Question 1:
On 12 August 2022, a divisional European patent application EP-F3 is filed in Italian per fax by three joint applicants: A, B and C. On 12 September 2022, a translation of EP-F3 in the language of the proceedings of its parent application is filed.
EP-F3's parent application is EP-F2, which is a divisional application of EP-F1.
EP-F3 comprises 1 page abstract, 40 pages description and 2 pages with 13 claims.
A is an Italian university.
B is an Italian enterprise which employs 500 persons, and which has an annual turnover of EUR 40 million and an annual balance sheet total of EUR 40 million.
C is an Italian national resident in the USA.
On 4 October 2022, a noting of loss of rights is sent because no fees have been paid.
A transfer of rights is planned for 19 December 2022: Applicant B will transfer its rights in respect of EP-F3 to applicant C.
a. What procedural steps must be taken for the transfer of rights to be recorded?
b. Under what circumstances is the filing in Italian valid? What steps need to be taken and what fees need to be paid to ensure that EP-F3 remains pending?
c. What needs to be done if the applicants want to pay the examination fee at the reduced rate provided for in Article 14(1) of the Rules relating to Fees?

Answer:
1. The application EP-F3 to be transferred has to be pending at the time of transfer (see steps under (b)). File a request for a transfer of rights (EPO Form 5050 can be used) and submit written evidence suitable for proving the transfer (with the signature of both the assignor and assignee). Pay the transfer fee.
2. The filing in Italian is valid only if the previous applications were also filed in Italian. Request further processing by paying the fee for further processing (50% of the relevant fees) by 14 December 2022 and pay the search fee, filing fee (without reduction) according to Rule 6(4) EPC including page fee (for eight pages) and additional fee for divisional second generation.
3. After the transfer of rights (at the latest by the time of payment of the reduced examination fee) the representative of the joint applicants should send a letter to the EPO stating that both applicants A and C are entities or natural persons covered by Rule 6(4) EPC (Form 1011 can be used). Request examination in Italian, a translation of the request for examination in the language of the proceedings must be refiled (Guidelines A-X, 9.2.3).



Question 2:
On 22 May 2020, applicant B filed US application US-B in English. Despite all due care being taken by applicant B, international application PCT-B claiming priority from US-B was only filed on 7 June 2021. The USPTO, acting as receiving Office, granted the applicant’s request for restoration of the right of priority on the basis that the failure to file PCT-B within the priority period was unintentional. On 9 December 2022, applicant B took all the steps required under Rule 159 EPC for PCT-B to enter the European phase before the EPO. When did the time limit for filing the request for restoration of the right of priority at the USPTO acting as receiving Office expire? What must be done before the EPO as designated Office, and by when, to ensure that the restoration of the right of priority is effective in the European phase?

Answer:
1. The request for restoration had to be filed within two months of the date on which the priority period expired, which is 26 July 2021. 
(The priority period expired on 22 May 2021 extended to 24 May 2021.
24 May 2021 + 2 months => 24 July 2021, extended to 26 July 2021).
2. (The restoration granted by the USPTO as receiving Office will not automatically be effective before the EPO because the EPO is not bound by the decision of any receiving Office under the "unintentional criterion".) To ensure that priority is restored during the European phase, the applicant should request restoration of priority within one month of the date on which the time limit for entry into EPO regional phase expires (Article 22 PCT)
(Rule 49ter.2(b)(i) PCT; Rule 159(1)) EPC sets a 31-month deadline)
22.05.2020 + 31 months = 22.12.2022
22.12.2022 + 1 month = 22.01.2023 (Sunday) extended to 23.01.2023 (Monday).
The fee for restoration of priority must be paid within the same time limit (Rule 49ter.2(b)(iii), (d) PCT).
The request for restoration of priority must be accompanied by a statement of reasons for the failure, despite meeting the due-care requirement, to file the international application within the priority period (Rule 49ter.2(b)(ii) PCT).



Question 3:
Your client CoffeeBreak filed a European patent application claiming a new type of coffee maker on 20 December 2021 but withdrew it before search. CoffeeBreak then asked you to file an international patent application claiming priority of the European patent application and with no amendments compared to that application. The priority application contains drawings that are essential for understanding the invention.
On 5 December 2022, you filed an international patent application claiming priority of the European patent application at the International Bureau, using PCT/RO/101. Your colleague handling a patent application for shoe soles left by mistake his drawings in your filing folder. Therefore, you filed the wrong drawings with the international patent application claiming the coffee maker instead of the correct drawings.
a. You discover your mistake today, 12 December 2022. Assuming that the International Bureau does not detect the wrong drawings, what actions can you take of your own volition to ensure that the correct drawings are included in the international patent application while maintaining the original filing date? What is the applicable time limit for performing these actions? Please give reasons for your answer.
b. You do not discover your mistake until receiving a PCT/RO/107 notification dated 4 January 2023 from the International Bureau. What actions can you take to ensure that the correct drawings are included in the international patent application while maintaining the original filing date? What is the applicable time limit for performing these actions? Please give reasons for your answer
c. What would be your answer to previous questions (a) and (b) if, at your client's request, you had not claimed priority of the European patent application? Please give reasons for your answer. You do not discover your mistake on filing the wrong drawings, and completely miss the notification dated 4 January 2023 from the International Bureau. You only find out about the mistake on 27 April 2023 after receiving the written opinion. The invention has not been and will not be made public by any means other than publication by the International Bureau. You intend to withdraw the international patent application before publication and file a new international patent application with the correct drawings.
d. Will you still be in time to prevent publication of the first international patent application? Please give reasons for your answer.

Answer:
1. Confirm to the receiving Office (International Bureau) that the drawings of the priority application are included in the international patent application through incorporation by reference (Rule 20(6) PCT). Send a copy of these drawings to the receiving Office (International Bureau) together with the confirmation. Within two months of the original filing date
5 December 2022 + 2 months => 5 February 2023 (Sunday) => extended to
6 February.
2. Same as (a) / (Confirm to the International Bureau that the drawings of the priority application are included in the international patent application through incorporation by reference, send a copy of these drawings to the International Bureau together with the confirmation).
RO/107 notification bears a two-month time limit,
4 January 2023 + 2 months => 4 March 2023 (Saturday) => extended to 6 March 2023
3. The requirement for incorporation by reference is that the priority of the earlier application must also have been claimed on filing (Rule 20(6) PCT). Thus, no remedy is possible in this case.
4. Yes, you can withdraw the application and prevent publication before completion of technical preparations for the publication. Publication is due promptly after the expiration of 18 months from the priority date, which is after 20 June 2023 (in practice Thursday, 22 June).
The technical preparations for publication are completed by the 15th day prior to the date of publication (see paragraph AG 9.014; in practice, withdrawal at the latest on Tuesday, 6 June).



Question 4:
On 10 December 2021, your client, a large Romanian company, filed a Romanian national patent application RO-H. RO-H is drafted in Romanian and comprises 32 pages of description and drawings, and four pages with 15 claims. Your client has informed you that they will prepare and forward an English translation of RO-H in due course. This will comprise 29 pages of description and drawings, four pages with 15 claims and an abstract comprising two pages. Your client wants you to file today, 12 December 2022, a European patent application EP-H drafted in Romanian and claiming priority of RO-H.
a. What fees have to be paid and what would be the last date for paying them?
b. You filed an automatic debit order for EP-H. On the decisive payment date, you receive an email from the EPO informing you that there are insufficient funds in your deposit account to cover any of the fees to be paid (as identified in your answer to question (a)). You replenish the account two days after receiving the email. Do you have to take any further action to ensure these fees are paid?
c. What is the time limit for filing an English translation of the application via the EPO's online services? What is the consequence for the time limit if, on the last day of the period for filing the translation, there is an unplanned outage of the EPO's online services which prevents you from filing it? The outage lasts for the whole of that day.

Answer:
1. The filing fee and the search fee shall be paid within one month of filing, i.e. by 12 January 2023, (Article 78(2) EPC and Rule 38(1) EPC). The filing fee includes the additional fee for two pages (36 pages plus one page of abstract (even if abstract is two pages) minus 35 pages = 2 pages, Rule 38(2), (3) EPC, Article 2(1), item 1a, RFees and Guidelines A-III, 13.2).
2. The payment is deemed to have been made on the date on which the account was duly replenished (point 8 AAD). Since this is after the due date for paying the fees, the application is deemed to be withdrawn (Article 78(2) EPC). No action is required as long as there are sufficient funds in the deposit account (the EPO will automatically debit the further processing fee, the search fee and the filing fee (which includes the page fee)).
3. A translation must be filed within two months of the filing of the application 
12 Dec 2022 + 2 months = 12 Feb 2023 (Sun) = 13 Feb 2023; or within two months of notification of a communication under Rule 58 EPC. If documents to be filed by one of the means of electronic communication permitted by the President of the European Patent Office (under Rule 2(1) EPC) cannot be received on the day on which a period for performing procedural acts expires, the period shall extend to the first working day on which all means of electronic filing are available (Rule 134(1) EPC and OJ EPO 2020, A120).



Question 5:
Applicant A filed European patent application EP-A1 in English in May 2019. It describes two different inventions, X and Y, and claims invention X only. The European search report was drawn up for invention X only. A communication pursuant to Article 94(3) EPC setting a time limit of four months for response was issued by the EPO on 16 May 2022. A two-month extension of this time limit was granted on 26 September 2022. As of today’s date, no response has been filed. Applicant A is now interested in invention Y. Today, 12 December 2022, he files a European divisional application EP-A2 based on EP-A1 and describing invention Y. No fees were paid, and no claims were submitted at the time of filing. What does applicant A have to do to have invention Y searched by the EPO?

Answer:
A divisional application can only be filed if the parent application is still pending. Currently, EP-A1 is deemed to be withdrawn because no response to the communication under Article 94(3) EPC was filed. The time limit for filing a response expired on 28 November 2022 (26 Saturday > Monday 28). In order to revert application EP-A1 to pending status, the applicant must request further processing by paying the further processing fee and file a response to the communication under Article 94(3) EPC.
The filing fee and search fee for EP-A2 are due on filing. They may be paid within one month of the date of filing of the divisional application (Rule 36(3) EPC). The third renewal fee and the fourth renewal fee for the divisional become due on filing. They can be validly paid without surcharge within four months of the date of filing of the divisional application (Rule 51(3) EPC) (otherwise with surcharge within six months of the same date).
The applicant should file claims directed to invention Y (Rule 40(1) EPC) in response to a communication from the EPO (under Rule 58 EPC setting a time limit of two months from the date of receipt to supply claims) at the latest.

