Legal Opinion:
[001] Today is 2 March 2021.
[002] I am the owner of PUGZ, a British manufacturer of pet products. We manufacture a popular dog leash known as SPRINGY (S). A dog leash is a rope or chain that can be attached to a dog collar to prevent the dog running off. Our SPRINGY leash has an elastic spring section to reduce the effect of strain on a dog’s neck when the leash is pulled tightly. We sell SPRINGY leashes in our key markets of the UK, France and Italy. Nonetheless, our customers tell us they are still concerned about the effect of strain on their dogs when the spring section of a SPRINGY leash is fully extended. 
[003] To address this problem, we sent our top researchers to the Chinese HOUND Institute in Beijing, where they worked under a collaboration agreement with HOUND researchers. After some weeks working together they developed a surprisingly clever fastener for attaching the SPRINGY leash to a dog collar. The fastener is called OH-NO (O) and is designed to detach the leash from the collar if the strain exceeds a particular limit.
[004] We realised that customers may be unhappy to have their dogs detached from a leash. Therefore, we asked our researchers to continue working with HOUND in China to improve their solution. From our research we found that retaining a connection between the collar and the leash even after the OH-NO fastener detaches has a surprisingly positive effect on the behaviour of the dog. We then invented an especially useful secondary connection between the leash and the collar in case the two are separated. We call this secondary connection COMEBACK (C).
[005] On 18 June 2018 we and HOUND jointly filed an international application (HP- PCT) in English at the Chinese patent office (CNIPA) as receiving office without a claim to priority. HP-PCT discloses and claims a SPRINGY leash comprising both an OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable. The international search report cited a single article from the Chinese journal PUPPY-PRESS as “technological background”. The article, published on 4 January 2017, discloses only a SPRINGY leash.
[006] In early 2018 our market research on OH-NO and COMEBACK suggested leashes with these features would not be commercially successful in Europe. On this basis, we agreed with HOUND that we would enter the national phase of HP-PCT in China only. HP-PCT entered the Chinese national phase in December 2020.
[007] Following the filing of HP-PCT our researchers returned to the UK to work on alternative improvements to SPRINGY, and in June 2018 we solely developed a modification to SPRINGY that we named YELP (Y). YELP is a high-pitch sound emitter that emits a high-pitched sound when the spring section of a SPRINGY leash reaches full extension. This sound is surprisingly effective at causing a dog to stop pulling on the leash to reduce the effect of strain on the dog.
[008] In conjunction with YELP we also developed a further modification to SPRINGY that we named AHHH (A). AHHH is a calming sound emitter that emits a calming sound when a dog has stopped pulling on the leash following a high-pitched sound emitted by YELP. The calming sound emitted by AHHH is surprisingly effective at pacifying dogs. 
[009] We filed a European patent application (P-EP) on 2 July 2018. P-EP discloses a SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification. P-EP also discloses a SPRINGY leash having both the YELP modification and the AHHH modification. In the description of P-EP we mention an inflatable sound barrier (B) on a dog leash for protecting a dogwalker’s ears from high-pitched sound. However, we did not include a description of any suitable sound barrier and, indeed, we have not yet been able to obtain such a sound barrier that works. P-EP was granted on 12 November 2020 with a single claim directed to a SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification and an inflatable sound barrier. P-EP is validated in Italy and we intend to maintain it in France and the UK.
[010] Much to our annoyance, we have discovered that since October 2018, our Italian competitor, WUFF, has made a commercial success of SPRINGY leashes having OH-NO fasteners and COMEBACK cables. WUFF developed their technology entirely independently and they sell their leashes in Italy, the UK, France and Germany.
[011] We found that WUFF has a granted European patent, W-EP, currently in force in the UK, France, Italy and Germany. W-EP was filed by WUFF on 29 June 2018 and discloses four separate embodiments: a SPRINGY leash; a SPRINGY leash having an OH-NO fastener; a SPRINGY leash having both an OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable; and a SPRINGY leash having the YELP modification. W-EP discloses surprising effects of OH-NO, COMEBACK and YELP consistent with the effects that we have found. W-EP was granted on 5 August 2019 with three claims. Claim 1 is directed to a SPRINGY leash. Claim 2, dependent on claim 1, comprises an OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable. Claim 3, also dependent on claim 1, comprises the YELP modification.
[012] A file inspection of W-EP shows that it claims priority from an application for an Italian utility model, W-IT, filed by WUFF on 10 July 2017 and disclosing two separate embodiments: a SPRINGY leash; and a SPRINGY leash having an OH-NO fastener. W-IT was not published and has been withdrawn.
[013] In April 2020 we filed an opposition against all claims of W-EP on the grounds of lack of novelty and inventive step substantiated with reference to the PUPPY-PRESS article. In October 2020 the EPO sent us a copy of WUFF’s written response to our opposition in which WUFF submitted a single request amending claim 1 of W-EP to further incorporate the OH-NO feature. Claim 2, dependent on claim 1, comprises COMEBACK. Claim 3 was made an independent claim directed to a SPRINGY leash having the YELP modification. Last week the EPO issued a summons to oral proceedings scheduled for October 2021. Along with the summons the EPO indicated that the amended claims of W-EP appear to be novel and inventive over the PUPPY-PRESS article.
[014] Following our opposition, WUFF filed their own opposition on 28 January 2021 against our patent P-EP. WUFF raises a first ground of opposition that the sound barrier feature is insufficiently disclosed. WUFF also raises a second ground of opposition that the claim of P-EP is not novel over W-EP. We reviewed the notice of opposition and we believe we can easily overcome the opposition by merely amending the claim of P-EP to replace the sound barrier feature with the AHHH modification.
[015] We have continued to search for prior art to improve our chances against W-EP. We located a Japanese patent application W-JP filed by WUFF on 2 January 2017 and published in July 2018. W-JP discloses and claims two embodiments: a SPRINGY leash and a SPRINGY leash with an OH-NO fastener. The W-JP application was explicitly withdrawn soon after publication.
[016] We are looking for your advice.
(1) What is the current patent situation in respect of:
• SPRINGY leashes in general (S)?
• A SPRINGY leash with an OH-NO fastener (S+O)?
• A SPRINGY leash with an OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable (S+O+C)?
• A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification (S+Y)?
• A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification and the AHHH modification (S+Y+A)?
• A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification and a sound barrier (S+Y+B)?
(2) Can we save our patent P-EP and why? Give a reasoned analysis.
(3) What improvements can we make to the current patent situation?
(4) After our improvements:
• Which products will we be able to stop WUFF from making and selling?
• Which products will WUFF be able to stop us from making and selling?

Answer:
1. What is the current patent situation in respect of:
- SPRINGY leashes in general (S)?
W-JP is the first application containing S and was published in July 2018. It is withdrawn so will not provide protection. W-IT contains S and is withdrawn. HP-PCT discloses, but does not claim, S and will have published around December 2019. W-EP claims priority from W-IT. However, W-IT is not the first application in respect of subject matter S and so the claim to priority in W-EP is not valid in respect of subject matter S. The effective date for subject matter S in W-EP is the filing date of W-EP. W-JP published after the effective date of S in W-EP. The PUPPY-PRESS paper is prior art for all pending patent applications and granted patents. The claim to S in W-EP as granted is not novel over PUPPY-PRESS. P-EP discloses, but does not claim, S and is granted. As the situation currently stands no valid patent protection for S exists.
- A SPRINGY leash with an OH-NO fastener (S+O)?
W-JP is the first application containing S+O and was published July 2018. It is withdrawn so will not provide protection. W-IT contains S+O and is withdrawn. HP-PCT discloses, but does not claim, S+O and will have published. S+O is present in W-EP as originally filed so the amended claim 1 of W-EP does not add subject matter. The claim to S+O in W-EP does not extend the scope of protection of W-EP as granted. W-EP claims priority from W-IT. However, W-IT is not the first application in respect of subject matter S+O and so the claim to priority in W-EP is not valid in respect of subject matter S+O. The effective date for subject matter S+O in W-EP is the filing date of W-EP. HP-PCT has not entered the European phase and so does not form part of the state of the art for W-EP. There is no prior art disclosing S+O for W-EP so the claim to S+O in W-EP is novel. S+O in W-EP is surprisingly clever, so it is inventive. According to the current situation W-EP is likely to be maintained in amended form with a claim to S+O.
- A SPRINGY leash with an OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable (S+O+C)?
HP-PCT is the first application directed to S+O+C. There is no prior art for HP-PCT disclosing S+O+C so the claim to S+O+C in HP-PCT is novel. HP-PCT is likely to lead to a granted patent in China giving protection for S+O+C to PUGZ and HOUND. W-EP claims priority from W-IT but W-IT does not disclose S+O+C. The effective date for the subject matter S+O+C in W-EP is the filing date of W-EP. There is no prior art for W-EP disclosing S+O+C (HP-PCT did not enter the European phase) so the claim to S+O+C in W-EP is novel. S+O+C in HP-PCT and W-EP has a surprisingly positive effect, so it is inventive. According to the current situation, W-EP is likely to be maintained in amended form with a claim to S+O+C.
- A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification (S+Y)?
W-EP is the first applications directed to S+Y. W-EP claims priority from W-IT but W-IT does not disclose S+Y. The effective date for the claim to S+Y in W-EP is the filing date of W-EP. There is no prior art for W-EP disclosing S+Y so the claim to S+Y in W-EP is novel. S+Y in W-EP is surprisingly effective, so it is inventive. According to the current situation W-EP is likely to be maintained in amended form with a claim to S+Y.
- A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification and the AHHH modification (S+Y+A)? P-EP is the only application to contain S+Y+A. P-EP discloses, but does not claim, S+Y+A which was published around January 2020. There are no granted patents or pending applications claiming S+Y+A.
- A SPRINGY leash with the YELP modification and a sound barrier (S+Y+B)?
P-EP is the only application to contain S+Y+B. P-EP discloses and claims S+Y+B which was published around January 2020 and is granted. B is not sufficiently disclosed in P-EP and it is not known how to make B. WUFF’s opposition of P-EP is likely to be successful.
2. Can we save our patent P-EP and why? Give a reasoned analysis.
The opposition period for P-EP expires 12th August 2021, so WUFF’s opposition was filed in time. W-EP does not disclose feature B and the claim of P-EP is therefore novel over W-EP. Feature B in the claim of P-EP cannot be deleted or replaced without extending the scope of protection. It is also not possible to add sufficient disclosure for feature B to P-EP without adding subject matter. Thus, the deficiencies in P-EP cannot be remedied in opposition proceedings and P-EP will be revoked.
3. What improvements can we make to the current patent situation?
The deadline for entering the EP regional phase for HP-PCT was 18th January 2021. This date has passed although it is still possible for HP-PCT to enter the EP phase. To do this, pay the fees for further processing and fulfil the requirements for entry to the European phase, including paying the renewal fee in respect of the 3rd year with the surcharge. HP-PCT will form part of the state of the art for novelty only for W-EP. The Chinese co-applicant HOUND must appoint a professional representative before the EPO. HP-PCT discloses S+O+C and, since it forms part of the state of the art, it anticipates the claim directed to S+O and the claim directed to S+O+C in W-EP. After HP-PCT enters to the European phase, file written submissions in the opposition proceedings filing the new evidence W-JP and file HP-PCT – having entered the European phase – identifying the invalid claim to priority and the lack of novelty of the amended claims in view of HP-PCT. The new evidence and argument are admissible because, since feature O was introduced into claim 1 from the description during opposition proceedings, there is a change to the subject of proceedings. Furthermore, HP-PCT was not prior art before it entered the European phase and so could not be cited earlier. W-EP will not be maintained as currently amended. W-EP can give WUFF protection for S+Y. Once HP-PCT has entered the European phase, file translations of claims of HP-PCT into French, German and Italian to obtain provisional protection in FR, DE, IT.
4. After our improvements:
- Which products will we be able to stop WUFF from making and selling? 
When granted in the European phase, HP-PCT will provide protection for S+O+C in Europe by validating in IT and maintaining in FR, UK, DE. PUGZ can stop WUFF making or selling products containing S+O+C in EP states in which HP-PCT in the European phase is validated or maintained, and China.
- Which products will WUFF be able to stop us from making and selling?
An amended W-EP claiming S+Y will enable WUFF to prevent PUGZ from using any product comprising S+Y, including S+Y+A, in EP states in Europe in which W-EP is validated or maintained.

Examiner's report:
This year’s Part II of paper D required candidates to analyse a complex patent situation recognising an invalid claim to priority, prior art under Article 54(3) EPC, sufficiency of disclosure, the possibility of a PCT application entering the European phase late, the effect of Articles 123(2) and 123(3) EPC and the admissibility of submissions in the opposition procedure.
The order of the questions provided a structure for candidates to conduct a complete analysis of the patent situation before considering improvements and consequences. Candidates who followed this structure generally did well in the analysis and spotted most of the relevant issues. Providing the current status of the rights includes an assessment of the validity of those rights. Candidates who immediately proposed improvements without fully analysing the situation as outlined in the paper often missed several relevant issues.
Many candidates recognised that W-IT is not the first application in respect of a SPRINGY leash (S) and a SPRINGY leash with OH-NO fastener (S+O), though in some cases HP-PCT was incorrectly judged to be prior art under Article 54(3) EPC in respect of P-EP or W-EP in spite of not having entered the European phase. Some candidates concluded that the Japanese patent application W-JP constituted prior art for these patents under Article 54(3) EPC leading to incorrect conclusions.
Candidates exhibiting a proper understanding of the interplay between Articles 123(2) and 123(3) EPC in respect of the subject matter of P-EP answered question 2 well, recognising that the deficiencies in P-EP cannot be remedied in opposition proceedings and P-EP will be revoked. However, a worrying number of candidates suggested amending the claim of P-EP to remove the feature of a sound barrier (B), or replacing or supplementing B with the AHHH modification (A).
A number of candidates surprisingly proposed filing a divisional application on the basis of granted patent P-EP. In the improvement of the situation, many candidates recognised the opportunity to enter the European phase in HP-PCT using further processing, though few noted the need to for the Chinese co-applicant, HOUND, to appoint a professional representative. When HP-PCT is in the European phase, a number of practical steps are necessary to ensure it is taken into account as prior art under Article 54(3) EPC. Most candidates skipped at least one of these steps. In particular, in addition to requesting the admission of evidence into the procedure citing the regionalised HP-PCT application, it is necessary to evidence the new fact that the subject matters S+O and S+O+C in W-EP have, as effective date, the filing date of W-EP. Candidates often neglected to mention this important fact to show the invalidity of the claims as amended in W-EP. Furthermore, some candidates omitted to request the admission of HP-PCT to the opposition procedure as relevant prior art under Article 54(3) EPC for W-EP.
Additionally, some candidates incorrectly concluded that amended claim 1 of W-EP directed to S+O is novel over the disclosure of a SPRINGY leash with OH-NO fastener and a COMEBACK cable (S+O+C) in HP-PCT in the European phase.

