Legal Opinion
Today is 8 March 2022. You receive the following e-mail from the firm Optimisme.
Dear Representative,
[001] My name is Candide. I am the General Manager of Italian company Optimisme (OPT). OPT specialises in plastic recycling. We design our own recycling machines in-house and we have them made by Torre (TOR), an Italian company manufacturing plastic recycling machines. When we started working with TOR in 2018, we signed an agreement. Under this agreement, TOR is bound to secrecy, and all intellectual property generated since then belongs to OPT. In future, we will manufacture these machines ourselves.
[002] A known process of recycling includes cutting the plastic waste into small pieces in a mill, i.e. in a container with blades rotating at its bottom. An inorganic filler in the form of a powder is fed to the mill to be mixed with the plastic pieces to increase rigidity of the plastic. The problem with this known machine is that the maximum amount of filler that can be fed to the mill is 10% by weight. If higher amounts are fed to the mill, part of the filler is ejected outside the machine and a lot of dust is generated. Conventionally, to reach 50% by weight of filler, the plastic exiting the mill must be processed with another machine, where more filler is mixed with the plastic.
[003] In January 2019, we invented a new machine for recycling plastic. In our machine the filler is fed to the bottom of the mill so that it is mixed with the plastic pieces while the plastic waste is cut. This is a great improvement over the prior techniques: we can feed up to 50% of filler to the plastic in the mill and during the process less dust is generated, so that workers are safer than before.
[004] On 3 June 2019 we gave TOR our complete technical drawings and a fully enabling explanatory report to enable them to manufacture our machine, which we called FEED. On 1 July 2019 we received a prototype of the FEED machine with one feeding duct at the bottom of the mill. We modified the FEED machine received from TOR by adding a second feeding duct at the bottom of the mill. We discovered that by using two feeding ducts for the filler, a surprisingly greater uniformity of the recycled plastic can be obtained. We filed a European patent application, OPT-EP1, on 22 July 2019. OPT-EP1 discloses and claims a machine comprising at least one duct for feeding filler at the bottom of the mill. OPT-EP1 also discloses the machine with two feeding ducts at the bottom of the mill. This feature is claimed in dependent claim 2.
[005] After filing OPT-EP1, we realised that by mounting a special water spray device (SPRAY) on the FEED machine it is possible to reduce the dust generated by the machine, surprisingly without affecting the properties of the recycled plastic. On 4 October 2019, we filed European patent application OPT-EP2 without claiming any priority. OPT-EP2 includes the entire description and claims of OPT-EP1; it additionally discloses the SPRAY device and the FEED machine with the SPRAY device mounted on it.
[006] On 30 September 2020, we filed international application OPT-PCT. OPT-PCT contains the entire description and claims of OPT-EP2 and additionally claims the SPRAY device per se, and the FEED machine with the SPRAY device mounted on it. OPT-PCT claims priority from OPT-EP2.
[007] OPT-EP1 was granted as filed. The mention of grant was published on 27 January 2021. OPT-EP1 was opposed by a German lawyer. The grounds of opposition are lack of novelty and inventive step based on two documents.
[008] The first document is TOR-EP, a European patent application filed by TOR on 3 June 2019. The figures in TOR-EP are identical to the drawings we gave TOR, and the paragraphs of the description are identical to paragraphs of the report we gave to them. TOR-EP has a single claim directed to a machine having a duct for feeding filler at the bottom.
[009] TOR-EP discloses a subject-matter almost identical to the subject-matter of OPT-EP1. The only difference is that TOR-EP is silent on the two feeding ducts of OPT-EP1. TOR-EP is also silent on the water spray device of OPT-EP2. A communication of the intention to grant was sent to TOR five days ago.
[010] The second document is one of our own videos showing our prototype FEED machine and explaining how it works. We uploaded the video to our website, where it has been publicly available since 10 July 2019. The prototype machine disclosed in the video has only one feeding duct and no water spray device. According to the opponent, a claim directed to a machine having two feeding ducts is obvious in view of a machine having a single duct.
[011] We received a communication from the Opposition Division dated 3 December 2021 inviting us to file a response to the opposition within four months. Please help us to prepare our response. In our opinion, the opposition should be rejected because it was filed by a lawyer who has no interest in the case. 
[012] There is another surprising advantage of having two ducts for feeding the filler to the bottom of the mill. We recently discovered that when filler in the form of a powder is fed from one duct and filler in the form of granules is fed from a second duct, the blades of the mill remain clean. The granules are made by compacting the filler powder. This feeding process, which we call CLEAN, provides an important advantage because it saves up to 30% of the costs of the recycling process by avoiding the machine having to be stopped in order to clean the blades. Feeding granules only does not provide this advantage.
[013] As it is such a valuable development, we want to protect the CLEAN process with a patent application. Before filing the application, we want to know the Opposition Division’s opinion on it. Our idea is to explain this newly discovered advantage of having two ducts when arguing inventive step, in our written response to the opposition.
[014] We filed our OPT-PCT application in view of a joint venture we plan to enter with Avidus, an investment fund which will help us to manufacture our own machines and expand our activities in the US, China and India. 
[015] There is another problem with TOR. Two weeks ago we received a “cease and desist” letter from TOR requesting us to cease any use of our FEED machine with the SPRAY device in view of their European patent TOR-EP-old. TOR-EP-old discloses and claims a water spray device that is identical to the one we make and use in our machine and which is disclosed in OPT-EP2. This water spray device was shown by TOR for a different purpose at a fair in Barcelona in 2014 which we attended. This water spray device was fully disclosed in a brochure with a date on it, which was handed out at the fair and is in our possession.
[016] TOR-EP-old was filed in 2015 without claiming priority and was granted in 2017. Avidus filed an opposition against TOR-EP-old on the ground of insufficiency of disclosure only. The opposition was rejected and Avidus appealed the decision of the Opposition Division. The appeal is pending.
[017] We attempted to contact TOR to resolve the above issues, but TOR refused to talk to us. Avidus informed us that they were contacted by TOR. TOR is using TOR-EP to convince Avidus to replace us with TOR in the joint venture. Avidus told us that if they reach an agreement with TOR, they will withdraw their appeal. We have a meeting with Avidus scheduled for next week, and we need your help on the following points:
1. Outline the patent situation as it currently stands for:
(a) the FEED machine with a feeding duct at the bottom of the mill
(b) the FEED machine with two feeding ducts at the bottom of the mill
(c) the CLEAN feeding process
(d) the SPRAY water spray device
(e) the FEED machine with the SPRAY water spray device
2. How would you advise us to respond to the opposition against OPT-EP1?
3. What could we do to improve our situation?
4. After the improvements, what products and methods could we stop TOR from making or using, and in which countries?

Answer:
1. (a) the FEED machine with a feeding duct at the bottom of the mill. TOR-EP is first filing for a FEED machine comprising at least one duct for feeding filler at the bottom of the mill (FEED-1). TOR-EP is novel and inventive because no pertinent prior art is cited and a greater amount of filler can be fed to the mill. TOR-EP is likely to be granted because a 71(3) communication was sent. TOR-EP is (presently) an Art. 54(3) document for OPT EP-2 and OPT-PCT applications that have a claim to at least one feeding duct, if OPT-PCT enters the EP phase. Such a claim is not novel over TOR-EP. Filing of TOR-EP is a violation of the secrecy agreement and thus the publication of TOR-EP is an evident abuse. The date of filing of TOR-EP is no earlier than six months preceding filing of OPT-EP1, therefore TOR-EP is a non prejudicial disclosure for OPT-EP1. OPT are the rightful owners of the invention disclosed and claimed in TOR-EP. OPT-PCT does not enjoy priority from OPT-EP2 for the subject matter of FEED-1, because OPT-EP2 is not the first application from the same applicant for those features. OPT-EP1 and OPT-EP2 would both be Art. 54(3) prior art for OPT-PCT should the latter enter EP phase. OPT-PCT would not be novel in Europe. The video is a prior art under Art. 54(2) for all of OPT-EP1, OPT EP-2 and OPT-PCT; in OPT applications the claims directed to a Feed machine comprising one duct are not novel.
(b) the FEED machine with two feeding ducts at the bottom of the mill. OPT-EP1 is first filing for a FEED machine comprising two ducts for feeding filler at the bottom of the mill (FEED-2). The video and TOR-EP disclose one single duct, therefore claim 2 in OPT-EP1 is novel. Claim 2 is inventive because of the surprising effect in greater uniformity of the recycled plastic. OPT-EP1 is prior art under Art 54(3) and novelty destroying for the same subject matter in OPT-EP2. OPT-PCT does not enjoy priority from OPT-EP2 for subject matter of FEED-2 because EP2 is not the first application from same applicant for those features. OPT-EP1 and OPT-EP2 would be Art. 54(3) prior art for OPT-PCT, if the latter enters EP phase; OPT-PCT would not be novel in Europe. OPT-PCT can lead to protection in non-European countries once OPT-PCT enters a national phase.
(c) the CLEAN feeding process. There is no prior art and there is a technical effect: clean process is novel and inventive. There is presently no patent application claiming CLEAN process.
(d) the SPRAY water spray device. TOR-EP-old is first filing for SPRAY. The disclosure at the fair in Barcelona is 54(2) prior art. The claim to a water spray device in TOR-EP-old is not novel. The opposition by Avidus was based on insufficient disclosure only. Novelty attack based on prior use in Barcelona would be a fresh ground of opposition. Avidus cannot introduce a fresh ground in Appeal proceedings without the consent of the Patentee. The appeal is still pending, if the patent is maintained, OPT will be restricted from making or using SPRAY. The claim in OPT-PCT to SPRAY is not novel over any of TOR-EP-old and the Barcelona fair. OPT-EP2 discloses but does not claim SPRAY.
(e) the FEED machine with the SPRAY water spray device. OPT-EP2 is first filing for FEED + SPRAY. OPT-PCT validly claims priority of OPT-EP2 for FEED + SPRAY. Only OPT-PCT claims the combination of FEED+SPRAY. Currently, there is no patent protection available. There is no prior art for the combination, FEED + SPRAY is novel and also inventive because the dust is reduced without affecting the properties of the recycled plastic.
2. Any person, including a German lawyer having no interest in the case, can file an opposition. The four-months period for responding expires on 13 April 2022. Claim 1 of OPT-EP1, directed to FEED-1, is not novel in view of the publicly available video of OPT. A claim directed to FEED-2 is novel. In the response argue that FEED-2 is inventive using the surprising effect on uniformity of recycled plastic and file a request with main claim limited to a mill with two feeding ducts. If you discuss your new invention CLEAN in your response, the reply letter would be available to the public through file inspection. Any later filed application for CLEAN would therefore not be novel over the disclosure in the reply letter. Also, the cleaning of the blades is a new technical effect not disclosed in or derivable from the opposed patent, as such it cannot be used to support inventive step in the opposed patent.
3. (a) FEED-1: The rights to TOR-EP are of OPT in view of the 2018 agreement with TOR. Institute entitlement proceedings in Italy to have TOR-EP assigned to OPT. Then notify the EPO of the pending entitlement proceedings and provide evidence of the same before patent is granted. The EPO will stay the proceedings of the application. Make sure that renewal fees are paid during stay of proceedings. Once TOR-EP is assigned to OPT, prosecute the application.
(b) FEED-2: Delete claims to two ducts in OPT-PCT, not novel over OPT-EP1. When entering EP phase maintain claims to two ducts in OPT-PCT outside EP.
(c) CLEAN: File the CLEAN application before discussing it with Avidus.
(d) SPRAY: Intervention is necessary for introducing the fresh ground of lack of novelty into appeal proceedings For intervention national proceedings are required: institute national proceedings before a Court in Italy for a ruling of non infringement. Within three months from start of proceedings, pay opposition fee, file notice of intervention based on lack of novelty over disclosure at Barcelona Fair. TOR-EP-old will be revoked. Make sure Avidus does not withdraw its appeal otherwise the appeal proceedings are terminated. Delete claims to SPRAY in OPT-PCT when entering national phases.
(e) FEED + SPRAY: Claims directed to a combination of machine and water spray device in OPT-EP2 are unsearched subject matter, not unitary with the original claims. Prosecution of the combination of Feed machine and spray device based on OPT-EP2 would only be possible if a divisional is filed. The combination is already covered by OPT-PCT; therefore abandon OPT-EP2 and enter EP phase of OPT-PCT by 04.05.22, with amended claims directed to combination of spray device and Feed machine. OPT-PCT outside Europe should have claims to FEED-2 and to the combination of Feed machine and spray device. Enter timely OPT-PCT in USA, China and India. The 30-months time limit expires on 04.04.22.
4. After TOR-EP is assigned to OPT and granted, OPT could stop Torre in EPO Countries from making or using a Feed machine with at least one feeding duct, thus also a Feed machine with two feeding ducts. After maintaining OPT-EP1 in amended form, OPT could stop Torre in EPO countries with OPT-EP1, from making or using FEED-2. OPT could stop Torre in view of OPT-PCT in non-EPO countries where OPT-PCT enters the national phase from making or using FEED-2. With OPT-EP1 or OPT-PCT OPT could stop Torre from carrying out the CLEAN process because to carry out CLEAN a Feed mill with two ducts is required. After filing the application for CLEAN process OPT could stop Torre from using the process in the Countries covered by the CLEAN application. OPT can stop Torre from making and using a Feed machine with Spray device in those countries where OPT-PCT enters the national phase.

Examiner's report:
Question 1 was in general well answered and the priority issues well analyzed.
Much to the Examiner’s delight, most of the candidates did follow in their response the scheme for the questions as it had been asked. Only some candidates instead of discussing the patent situation by subject matter followed an approach by patent application thus losing some marks because of incomplete analysis. It was often not detected that OPT-EP1 is a prior art document (for novelty only) to subsequent filings OPT-EP2 and OPT-PCT. The same occurred with reference to OPT-EP2 being an Art. 54(3) document for OPT-PCT.
Concerning the appeal many candidates recognized the impossibility of introducing a fresh ground by Avidus without Torre’s consent. Some candidates wrongly suggested filing third party observations. 
Almost all the candidates correctly advised against discussing CLEAN process with the Opposition Division, but very few recognized that OPT-EP1 does not disclose the cleaning effect and that it cannot therefore be used to argue inventive step.
Few candidates realized the urgency of acting asap with entitlement proceedings before TOR-EP could be granted and that renewal fees must be paid while proceedings are stayed.
Too many candidates wrongly advised to intervene in pending appeal proceedings solely on the basis of Torre’s cease and desist letter, without mentioning that it was necessary to institute proceedings before an Italian Court. The three-months time limit for intervention was seldom mentioned.
Most of the candidates noticed that OPT-2 does not claim the FEED + SPRAY combination, but only a minority realized that the combination could not be claimed as it was a not searched subject matter. Very few candidates suggested abandoning OPT-2 and prosecuting with OPT-PCT for the combination FEED + SPRAY.
Question 4 was generally well answered even though some candidates’ answer was a generic FTO rather than the required response.

