General comments:
Candidates are reminded that they should pay attention to the way questions are asked and should not simply repeat information from the paper in the answer. Repeating information perse is not awarded any marks. Alternative answers, one being correct and one being wrong, for the markers to choose from do not attract any marks. In part I, full marks are only awarded when the full legal basis is cited to support the analysis. Candidates lost many marks due to missing or incomplete legal basis. The examiners note that this issue has become more acute in recent years, with the 2023 answers showing an all-time low in the citation of legal basis from e.g. the guidelines and case law. It is noted that “answering legal question” as is the purpose of Part I, requires not only understanding the legal provisions, but also being able to cite the correct legal basis for the answers. Citing only the legal basis or repeating the text therefrom without any further explanation, reasoning or providing advice generally does not attract any marks. However, alternative relevant legal basis not mentioned in the possible solution also attracted marks. It is noted in this respect that the online examination with direct access to part of the syllabus in electronic form, appears to be seen as an invitation to copy articles, rules and paragraphs from the guidelines, for which full marks are only awarded if, apart from the copied text, the explanation is also provided in view of the situation in the question. Marks were also often missed due to mistakes in calculations of time limits.



Question 1:
Applicant A filed a European patent application EP-A, which describes and claims
- a first invention comprising two alternative solutions to a technical problem consisting of features B+C and B+D respectively, and
- a second invention consisting of features E+F.
The first and second inventions are not linked by a single general inventive concept. Only the first invention was searched, and relevant prior art was found only for B+C. In the light of the technical problem, it is directly and unambiguously apparent that feature B is indispensable for the function of the first invention. Applicant A filed divisional applications DIV1 and DIV2, both based directly on EP-A. DIV1 as filed claims and describes only feature D. DIV2 as filed claims and describes only the combination B+D+F, wherein F is presented as an optional feature. Subsequently, the examining division issued a written decision dated 3 January 2023, refusing EP-A on the ground that a claim directed to B+C lacked novelty. Today, DIV1 and DIV2 are pending.
(a) Can valid patents be obtained for DIV1 and DIV2 and what should be done?
(b) Can applicant A still prosecute invention E+F and what should be done?

Answer:
(a) No valid patent can be obtained for DIV1. A claim without B extends beyond the content of the parent application, Guidelines H-V, 3.1, because the same principles as for assessing added subject-matter under Art. 123(2) EPC are to be applied in the assessment of Art. 76(1) EPC, G 1/05. On the other hand, B cannot be reinstated in DIV1, because it is not originally disclosed in DIV1, Art. 123(2) EPC. For DIV2, a valid patent can be obtained. Parent application EP-A was pending when DIV2 was filed, R. 36(1) EPC. As it stands, the claim of DIV2 with feature F extends beyond the content of the parent application, Art. 76(1) EPC, because EP-A does not disclose F in combination with B+D. Hence, feature F needs to be removed from DIV2 to satisfy Art. 76(1) EPC. According to G 1/05, DIV2 can be amended even if EP-A was no longer pending. Feature F is optional. Therefore, removing feature F does not violate Art. 123(2) EPC. Since there is no relevant prior art for B+D, B+D is new and inventive, Art. 52(1), 54 and 56 EPC.
(b) An application which has been refused by the first instance is still pending until the expiry of the period for filing an appeal, G 1/09. Hence, EP-A is pending until 03.01.2023 + 10 days (Rule 126(2) EPC) + 2 months (Art. 108 EPC) = 13.03.2023 (Mon). To prosecute invention E+F, applicant A should thus file a divisional application claiming and describing E+F based on EP-A until 13.03.23, Rule 36(1) EPC.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates realised that DIV1 cannot lead to a valid patent, because the omission of feature B violates Art. 76(1) EPC and B cannot be reintroduced in DIV1 because of Art. 123(2) EPC. However, the majority of candidates did not cite the legal basis in Guidelines H-V, 3.1 that the omission of a feature that is indispensable for the function of the invention in the light of the technical problem violates Art. 123(2) EPC and that the same criterion is applied for the assessment of Art. 76(1) EPC. The majority of candidates realised that optional feature F needs to be removed from DIV2. However, many candidates did not realise that the fact that EP-A was pending when divisional DIV2 was filed constitutes a condition for obtaining a valid patent for DIV2. Moreover, a number of candidates failed to argue that there is no relevant prior art for B+D and that B+D is thus new and inventive. Most candidates correctly noted that a divisional application based on EP-A needs to be filed to prosecute invention E+F. Most candidates also realised that EP-A is still pending until the expiry of the period for filing a notice of appeal. However, the correct legal basis G 1/09 was not always cited.



Question 2:
On 5 May 2022, applicant B resident in France filed an international patent application PCT-B with the EPO as receiving Office. Applicant B intended to claim priority from the US application US-B filed by applicant B on 9 July 2021. While the priority claim in the request of PCT-B stated the correct filing date of US-B, it included a typographical error in one digit of the application number of US-B. The request contained a certified copy of US-B. The description of PCT-B includes a statement that priority is claimed from US-B indicating the correct application number of US-B. Otherwise the description, the claims and the drawings are identical to those of US-B. In May 2022, applicant B received an invitation issued by the EPO as receiving Office to correct the priority claimed in the request of PCT-B. Unfortunately, applicant B overlooked this invitation and did not reply to it. The EPO acting as International Searching Authority transmitted the international search report to applicant B on 12 July 2022.
(a) Is the priority claim considered to have been made for the purposes of the procedure under the PCT?
(b) What is the last day to file a demand for international preliminary examination?
(c) Is it still possible to rectify the priority claim in the international phase?

Answer:
(a) The priority claim and the number in the priority document are inconsistent. Although the applicant failed to reply to the invitation, the priority claim is considered to have been made under the PCT, because the exceptions under Rule 26bis.2 PCT apply:
- The deficiency relates to an inconsistency between an indication in the priority claim and the corresponding indication appearing in the priority document, Rule 26bis.2 (c)(ii) PCT, and
- PCT-B was filed within the priority period of US-B, Rule 26bis.2(c)(iii) PCT, i.e. before 09.07.2021 + 12 months = 09.07.2022 (Sat), Art. 8 PCT and Art. 4C(1) PC, extended to 11.07.2022, Rule 80.5 PCT.
(b) The demand may be made at any time before the expiration of the later of the following periods, Rule 54bis.1(a)(i) and (ii) PCT:
- A first period which is three months from the date of transmittal of the international search report to the applicant, i.e. 12.07.2022 + 3 months = 12.10.2022 (Wed)
- A second period which is 22 months from the priority date, i.e. 09.07.2021 + 22 months = 09.05.2023 (Tue). Hence, the demand may be made until 09.05.2023.
(c) Yes, the mistake in the priority claim can be rectified under Rule 91.1 PCT, because it would not cause a change in the priority date, Rule 91.1(g)(iv) PCT. The mistake was made in the request. Therefore B should submit a request for rectification to the EPO acting as receiving Office, Rule 91.1(b)(i) PCT and Rule 91.2 PCT. The request should be submitted at the latest on 09.07.2021 + 26 months = 09.09.2023 (Sat), extended to 11.09.2023, Rule 80.5 PCT.It shall specify the mistake to be rectified, i.e. the erroneous application number, and the proposed rectification, i.e. claiming priority from US-B with the correct application number. The PCT request is part of the international application as filed, Art. 3(2) PCT. Hence the “applicable date” for the purposes of R. 91.1(c) PCT is the international filing date, Rule 91.1(f)(i) PCT. It is obvious that at the filing date, something else was intended than the erroneous priority application number and that nothing else could have been intended by applicant A than the correct application number of US-B, i.e. the proposed rectification, because:
- the description of PCT-B comprises the correct priority claim,
- the description, claims and drawings of PCT-B are otherwise identical to those of US- B, and
- the certified copy of US-B was filed on the filing date. The criteria for correction applied by the EPO acting as receiving Office specified in Rule 91.1(c) PCT are therefore met and the priority claim will be corrected.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates realised that the time limit to correct the priority claim under Rule 26bis PCT has already expired. Most candidates also realised that the priority claim is considered to have been made and correctly calculated the time limit to file a demand. Part (c) was less well answered. Some candidates suggested to rectify the priority claim under Rule 91.1 PCT, but not all of them indicated the necessary steps that applicant B needs to carry out for requesting the rectification. Few candidates indicated the reasons why the conditions for rectifying the priority claim were met if the steps were carried out. Some candidates wrongly suggested to proceed according to Rule 26bis.2(e) PCT, which does not lead to a rectification of the priority claim, but to a publication of “information concerning the matter”.



Question 3:
Company C filed European patent application EP-C on 14 September 2018. The mention of the grant of EP-C was published on 8 June 2022. Company D is concerned about infringing EP-C with its products sold in Germany since July 2022. Company D is preparing notice of opposition against EP-C and is confident that it will get the patent revoked. Today, company D consults the European Patent Register and notices that the representative of company C sent a fax to the EPO containing both a request that EP-C be revoked and an order to debit the revocation fee from its deposit account. Company D also noticed that company C has not yet paid any renewal fees to the German Patent and Trade Mark Office.
(a) What is the current status of the revocation proceedings for EP-C?
(b) Why should company D file opposition against EP-C?

Answer:
(a) The request for revocation was validly filed by fax. However, the debiting order is not valid because it was filed by fax, ADA2022 7.1.3. Therefore, revocation proceedings are not pending at present, Art. 105a(1) EPC.
(b) The period for filing an opposition expires on 08.06.22 + 9 months (Art. 99(1) EPC) = 08.03.23 (Wed) extended to 09.03.23 (Rule 134(1) EPC) since the EPO in Berlin is closed on that day. A first reason for filing an opposition against EP-C is that there is no certainty that EP-C will be revoked, because revocation proceedings are not pending. A second reason is that the renewal fee to pay to the German Patent and Trademark Office fell due on 30.09.22, but may still be paid with surcharge until 31.03.23, National Law Table VI. Since Germany is a party to the London agreement, EP-C is currently in force in Germany.The renewal fee with surcharge may be paid after the end of the opposition period. Hence, at the end of the opposition period, there will be no guarantee that EP-C will lapse in Germany. A third reason is that, irrespective of whether or not company C lets EP-C lapse by not paying the renewal fees, it is still advisable to file an opposition because a revocation or a limitation in opposition has an ex tunc effect, Art. 68 EPC. If the patent merely lapses, company D may still be sued for having infringed the patent with their products sold between July 2022 and lapse of the patent.

Examiner's report:
Fewer than half of the candidates noticed that a debit order cannot be filed by fax and revocation proceedings are thus not pending. Most candidates realised that there is still time to file an opposition. Regarding the calculation of the opposition period, full marks were also awarded to candidates not having noted the closure of the Berlin office on 08.03.2023 (only published in OJ 2022, A107 in November 2022) and thus concluded that the opposition period ends on 08.03.23. Some candidates noticed that the renewal fee to pay to the German Patent and Trademark Office could still be paid with surcharge and that EP-C was currently in force in Germany. Few candidates noted that a revocation or limitation of the patent in opposition proceedings has an ex tunc effect, whereas company D could still be sued for infringement if the patent merely lapses. Many candidates did not realise that the purpose and effect of actively filing an opposition are different than passively awaiting lapse of the patent or the outcome of possible revocation proceedings.



Question 4:
European patent EP-E was assigned from company E to company F. The transfer of ownership was recorded in the European Patent Register in November 2022. EP-E was revoked by a written decision of the opposition division issued on 19 December 2022. In February 2023 you received an email from company F instructing you to file an appeal on its behalf. On 28 February 2023 you filed notice of appeal and paid the appeal fee. Today, you realise that the notice of appeal was erroneously filed in the name of company E, rather than in the name of company F.
(a) What is the current status regarding the admissibility of the appeal?
(b) How can you improve the situation?

Answer:
(a) The time limit for filing the notice of appeal ended on 19.12.2022 +10 days (Rule 126(2) EPC) + 2 months (Art. 108 EPC) = 28.02.2023 (Tue), so the notice of appeal was filed in time. The transfer of the patent was registered by the EPO before the decision was issued. Hence, company E was not a party to the proceedings. Therefore, company E was not entitled to file the appeal, Art. 107 EPC. Currently, the appeal is thus likely to be rejected as inadmissible, Rule 101(1) EPC.
(b) The error in the appellant's identity can be corrected under Rule 139 EPC, provided that the correction does not reflect a later change of mind as to whom the appellant should be, but on the contrary only expresses what was intended when filing the appeal (G 1/12). Therefore, you can improve the situation by requesting correction of the appellant's name under Rule 139 EPC as soon as possible, such that company F becomes the appellant. For that you have to provide evidence of the original intention, e.g. a copy of the email of company F instructing you to file an appeal. The EPO will then correct the appellant's identity to be company F. Since company F is an adversely affected party to the proceedings, the appeal will be admissible, Art. 107 EPC.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates realised that the appeal was currently likely to be rejected as inadmissible. Most candidates also suggested to correct the appellant’s identity under Rule 139 EPC. However, few candidates indicated that the request for correction of the appellant’s name should be filed as soon as possible and that evidence of the original intention should be provided. Few candidates mentioned that after correction of the appellant’s name, the appeal is admissible because company F is adversely affected by the decision. Marks were also awarded to candidates suggesting to request the correction under Rule 101(2) EPC.



Question 5:
On 2 December 2022 Portuguese applicant G filed international patent application PCT-G in English with the Portuguese Patent Office (INPI). By invitation dated 9 December 2022, INPI invited G to file an abstract. Despite taking all due care, G filed the missing abstract with INPI only on 3 March 2023. Yesterday, G received a notification from INPI declaring PCT-G withdrawn.
(a) Why was PCT-G declared withdrawn? What will be the legal consequence of this withdrawal in the designated states of PCT-G if nothing is done?
(b) Applicant G wants to revive PCT-G before the EPO. What procedural steps must applicant G carry out?

Answer:
(a) A PCT application shall contain an abstract, Art. 3(2) PCT. A missing abstract is a defect under Art. 14(1)(a)(iv) PCT. The invitation from the INPI is an invitation under Art. 14(1)(b) and Rule 26.1 PCT. A time limit of two months was set under Rule 26.2 PCT, which expired on 9 February 2023 (Thu). PCT-G was thus declared withdrawn by the INPI, because G filed the abstract too late, Art. 14(1)(b) PCT. If nothing is done, according to Art. 24(1)(ii) PCT, PCT-G will cease to have the effect of a regular national application in each designated state, pursuant to Art. 11(3) PCT.
(b) The EPO acting as designated Office shall excuse the missing of the time limit for reasons admitted under the EPC, Art. 48(2)(a) PCT, namely further processing or re-establishment, Rule 82bis.2 PCT, Art. 121 and Art. 122 EPC. Under the EPC, regarding the time limit of two months provided for in Rule 58 EPC in case of a missing abstract, further processing is ruled out (Rule 135(2) EPC), but re-establishment of rights is possible (Art. 122 EPC and Rule 136(3) EPC). According to Guidelines E-IX, 2.9.1 and 2.9.2, G must:
- request the International Bureau to send copies of documents forming PCT-G to the EPO acting as designated Office;
- pay the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c) EPC;
- request the EPO acting as designated Office to excuse the missing of the time limit, pay the fee for re-establishment (Rule 136(1) EPC) and prove all due care (Rule 136(2) EPC).
These steps have to be carried out before 06.03.2023 + 2 months (Rule 136(1) EPC) = 06.05.2023 (Sat), extended under Rule 134(1) EPC to 08.05.2023 (Mon), because removal of the cause of non-compliance is the date of actual receipt of the communication noting a loss of rights, Guidelines E-VIII, 3.1.3.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates gave the correct reason why PCT-G was declared withdrawn and correctly stated the legal consequence that PCT-G will cease to have the effect of a regular national application in each designated state. Although some candidates referred to the excuse procedure, few candidates indicated the steps that must be carried out to revive PCT-G before the EPO. In particular, few candidates noted that G must request the International Bureau to send copies of documents forming PCT-G to the EPO and pay the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c) EPC. Many candidates did not realise that the removal of the cause of non-compliance is the date of actual receipt of the communication noting a loss of rights (Guidelines E-VIII, 3.1.3) and thus did not correctly calculate the time limit for requesting excuse (re-establishment).



Question 6:
European patent application EP-H describes a product P, a method only resulting in product P and a particular use of product P as a fertiliser to enhance plant growth. EP-H was granted with a single claim to product P. Opposition was validly filed against EP-H based on the ground of lack of novelty. The opponent cited EP-J, a document under Article 54(3) EPC that discloses the same product P, wherein P is obtained by a different method, and the use of product P as a detergent.
(a) How should EP-H be amended to provide the maximum scope of protection? Give reasons why EP-H as amended meets the requirements of Articles 123 and 54 EPC.
(b) How would your answer to (a) change if EP-H described product P for use as a medicament rather than describing the use of product P as a fertiliser?

Answer:
(a) The granted claim lacks novelty, Art. 100(a), 52(1) and 54(3) EPC. There is no basis for an amended product claim that would satisfy the requirement of novelty. EP-H should thus be amended as follows: The granted claim should be replaced by a claim directed to the “use of product P as a fertilizer”. This claim satisfies the requirements of Art. 123(3) EPC, because it defines the use of product P for a particular purpose to achieve an effect, G2/88. Moreover, the use claim satisfies the requirements of Art. 123(2) EPC because this use is originally disclosed in EP-H. This claim is also new, Art. 54 EPC, because EP-J does not show the particular use of P as a fertilizer. In addition, a claim directed to the method of producing P as disclosed in EP-H should be added. Since this method only results in product P and a product claim confers protection to all processes for making that product, this claim does not extend the protection conferred thereby, Art. 123(3) EPC and Guidelines H-V, 7.2. Moreover, as this method claim is originally disclosed in EP-H, it fulfils the requirement of Art. 123(2) EPC. Since EP-J discloses a different method, the method claim is new (Art. 54 EPC).
(b) The amended claim to the use of product P will have to be re-formulated to a purpose-related product claim, i.e. “product P for use as a medicament.” The reason is that a claim relating to “the use of product P as a medicament” is excluded from patentability as it relates to a method for treatment of the human or animal body by therapy, Art. 53(c) EPC. Such a claim does not extend the conferred protection (Art 123(3) EPC), because the scope of protection of purpose-related product claims is limited to the substance or composition in the context of its medical use, Guidelines G-VI, 7.1. Since the medical use of product P is not known from the prior art, such a claim satisfies the requirement of novelty under Art. 54(4) EPC.

Examiner's report:
Regarding part (a), most candidates suggested to replace the granted claim by a use claim and by a method claim. However, few candidates noted that the granted claim lacks novelty and that this is a ground for opposition under Art. 100(a) EPC. Some candidates wrongly suggested to file a purpose-related product claim, e.g. a product claim disclaiming the use as a detergent, or a product-by-process claim. Most candidates realised that in situation (b) the use claim is excluded from patentability and needs to be reformulated as a purpose-related product claim, i.e. “product P for use as a medicament”. However, few candidates gave reasons why such a claim does not extend the conferred protection.

