Legal Opinion
[001] Today (7 March 2023) you received the following letter.
[002] We, Whiter, are a manufacturer of nappies based in Sweden. We develop nappies for newborns who have to be hospitalised. The health of such newborns has to be checked frequently and one way to do so is by analysing their urine. We produce and sell our nappies in Europe, China and the USA.
[003] Nappies that indicate the presence of urine with a visual indicator on the nappy have been known for a long time. They are disclosed, for example, in a journal article published in March 2016 describing a nappy with a strip of paper on the nappy’s outer part that changes colour when the nappy gets wet. This type of indicator has a major drawback: it is necessary to look at the nappy and thus remove the newborn’s clothes to see if urine is present.
[004] We have been doing some research and come up with the idea of using a control unit (abbreviated “CU”) and electrodes (abbreviated “E”) to detect the presence of urine. When urine is present, an acoustic signal is generated to warn someone taking care of the newborn wearing the nappy. The acoustic signal remedies the above drawback.
[005] When doing this research, a member of our team remembered the “Handbook of Urine Detection”, which was published in May 2017 and discloses nappies comprising an electronic visual indicator, a control unit and electrodes to detect the presence of urine. The handbook teaches that the detection of the presence of urine can be achieved with electrodes made of any conductive material. The examples in the handbook show electrodes made of conductive plastic. Albeit electronic, this indicator is still visual, and therefore it is still necessary to remove the baby’s clothes to see if urine is present.
[006] Our research also revealed that a nappy with a control unit, besides merely detecting the presence of urine, can surprisingly also be used to directly analyse the urine on the nappy by means of specific electrodes. In this way, the newborn’s health can be checked more efficiently.
[007] Based on our research, on 8 September 2020 we filed European application EP-WA, which discloses and claims a nappy comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (abbreviated “CU-Em-sound”).
[008] On the same day we also filed European application EP-WB, which discloses and claims:
- in independent claim 1, a nappy comprising a control unit and specific electrodes G made of conductive plastic (abbreviated “CU-EG”), wherein the control unit and the electrodes are configured to measure glucose in the urine, and
- in independent claim 2, a nappy comprising a control unit and specific electrodes P made of conductive plastic (abbreviated “CU-EP”), wherein the control unit and the electrodes are configured to measure the pH of the urine.
Such specific electrodes belong to the state of the art, but have previously been used only in the food industry.
[009] Both applications were filed using EPO Form 1001 without claiming priority. They were searched by the EPO.
[010] For EP-WA the search report only cites documents in category A, including the above-mentioned handbook. The examination and designation fees for EP-WA were paid.
[011] The EPO found that EP-WB lacked unity. We did not pay any additional search fee and, upon entering the examination phase, we restricted EP-WB to the first invention, i.e. CU-EG. The renewal fee for EP-WB was paid in August 2022. The Rule 71(3) communication was issued for EP-WB, and we replied to it on 28 February 2023 by paying the prescribed fees and by filing the translations of claim 1 as filed.
[012] For about a year, we have been producing and selling nappies comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of gold (a known metal) for detecting the presence of urine.
[013] We have also realised that the second aspect of EP-WB is worth pursuing. Therefore yesterday we filed European divisional application EP-WDIV, directed to a nappy comprising a control unit and the electrodes P made of conductive plastic for measuring the pH of the urine. We have not paid any of the required fees for this divisional application yet, but we plan to pay them tomorrow. When preparing this letter for you, we realised that we made a mistake by indicating EP-WA as the parent application in the EPO Form 1001 for EP-WDIV.
[014] As we progressed with our research, we filed European application EP-WC on 6 May 2022, without claiming priority. The description of EP-WC discloses, in a first aspect, a nappy which transmits a signal to a baby phone when urine is present. In this way, someone taking care of the baby is warned that the nappy is wet. In a second aspect, independent from the first, the description of EP-WC discloses a nappy in which the absorbent comprises substance X. Substance X has been known for decades as an absorbent, but it has never been used in nappies, and it is surprisingly efficient at neutralising the odour of the urine. EP-WC contains only one claim, which is directed to a nappy comprising a transmitter for sending a signal to a baby phone, a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (abbreviated “CU-Em-transmit”). Last month we received the search report for EP-WC, which cites only documents in category A.
[015] We are soon going to change our production line by replacing the acoustic warning means with transmitters. We are confident that nappies which transmit signals to baby phones improve the quality of the newborns’ sleep and therefore will be much more appreciated by our customers than the ones emitting the acoustic signal.
[016] Our competitor Zuma is planning to launch a new line of nappies in the US market next month that neutralise urine odours and in which the absorbent comprises substance X. This was announced on its website last week.
[017] Researching our competitor’s activities, we discovered European application EP-Z, which was filed by Zuma on 14 January 2019 claiming priority from its US application US-Z. The latter was filed on 15 January 2018 and then abandoned. Application EP-Z discloses and claims a nappy comprising a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (abbreviated “CU-Em”). The only metals mentioned in EP-Z are copper and platinum.
[018] The European search report for EP-Z was published in July 2019. It cites European application EP-Y, which was filed in November 2016, published in May 2018 and withdrawn after publication. EP-Y discloses and claims a nappy comprising an electronic visual indicator, a control unit and electrodes made of silver (a known metal) for detecting the presence of urine.
[019] We inspected the file of EP-Z and noticed that a patent was granted with a single claim directed to a nappy comprising a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine, wherein the electrodes are not made of silver. The mention of the grant of the patent was published on 17 August 2022. Furthermore, we have noticed that US-Z discloses a nappy comprising a control unit and electrodes made of a conductive material for detecting the presence of urine, and that the only exemplary embodiment in US-Z concerns electrodes made of conductive plastic.
Questions:
1. Analyse the patent situation for the following subject-matter:
(a) nappies comprising a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (CU-Em),
(b) nappies comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (CU-Em-sound),
(c) nappies comprising a control unit and the electrodes G for measuring glucose in the urine (CU-EG),
(d) nappies comprising a control unit and the electrodes P for measuring the pH of the urine (CU-EP),
(e) nappies comprising a transmitter for sending a signal to a baby phone, a control unit and electrodes made of metal for detecting the presence of urine (CU-Em-transmit),
(f) nappies in which the absorbent comprises substance X.
2. As the situation currently stands
(a) is Zuma free to produce and sell nappies that neutralise urine odours and in which the absorbent comprises substance X, and
(b) are we free to produce and sell:
- nappies comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of gold for detecting the presence of urine (CU-E(Au)-sound),
- nappies comprising a transmitter for sending a signal to a baby phone, a control unit and electrodes made of gold for detecting the presence of urine (CU-E(Au)-transmit),
- nappies comprising a control unit and the electrodes G for measuring glucose in the urine (CU-EG), and
- nappies comprising a control unit and the electrodes P for measuring the pH of the urine (CU-EP)?
3) What can we do to improve our rights and position?

Answer:
Question 1 - Current situation
a) CU-Em: EP-Y is the first filing for nappies comprising a control unit and electrodes, which are however made of a specific metal, i.e. silver, to detect the presence of urine. EP-Y is withdrawn and cannot be revived. EP-Z is the first filing for nappies comprising a control unit and electrodes made of metal in general to detect the presence of urine. Irrespective of the disclaimer, the claimed subject-matter of EP-Z does not validly claim the priority date from US-Z, because the two applications do not relate to the same invention, as the electrode material is more generic in US-Z than in EP-Z. The effective date is therefore the filing date of EP-Z. EP-Y was filed before and published in the priority period of EP-Z, and it is full prior art. The subject-matter of the amended claim is novel because none of the prior art documents discloses electrodes, which are made of metal other than silver. However, it does not involve an inventive step over the handbook, because the distinguishing feature is a well-known alternative for nappy electrodes to detect the presence of urine. By claiming electrodes not made of silver, there is an undisclosed disclaimer in the granted claim of EP-Z, because silver was not mentioned in EP-Z. An undisclosed disclaimer can be allowed to restore novelty over an accidental disclosure and/or a prior right. EP-Y is neither a mere prior right, nor an accidental disclosure, as it relates to nappies for the detection of urine, like EP-Z. Hence, the undisclosed disclaimer is not allowable, as it represents added matter. Altogether, the claim of EP-Z is invalid.
b) CU-Em-sound: EP-WA is the first and only application for nappies comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of metal to detect the presence of urine. EP-WA does not claim priority, and the effective date is the filing date. The claimed subject-matter is novel, because there is no disclosure of nappies comprising acoustic warning means in the prior art. It also involves an inventive step, because it is not suggested and it remedies the drawback of the visual indicator. Renewal fees fell due on 30.09.2022. It shall be checked if they have been paid. Anyway, they are still payable with surcharge until 31.03.2023. EP-WA could proceed to grant.
c) CU-EG: EP-WB is the first and only application for nappies comprising a control unit and special electrodes G made of conductive plastic to determine glucose in the urine. EP-WB does not claim priority, and the effective date is the filing date. The claimed subject-matter is novel, because there is no disclosure of nappies with the special electrodes G configured to measure glucose in the prior art. It also involves an inventive step, because it was not obvious to adopt known electrodes used in a remote field. EP-WB was limited to claim this subject-matter, and Whiter already approved the documents for grant, so that the decision to grant can be expected.
d) CU-EP: EP-WB is the first application for nappies comprising a control unit and special electrodes P made of conductive plastic to measure the pH of urine. This subject-matter is now only claimed in EP-WDIV in an invalid manner, because EP-WA is the parent application due to the mistake in Form 1001. EP-WA does not disclose CU-EP and therefore this subject-matter in EP-WDIV goes beyond the content of the parent application as filed. There is no claim directed to CU-EP, which could lead to patent protection.e) CU-Em-transmit EP-WC is the first and only application for nappies comprising a transmitter for a baby phone, a control unit and electrodes made of metal to detect the presence of urine. EP-WC does not claim priority, and the effective date is the filing date. The claimed subject-matter is novel, because there is no disclosure of nappies comprising transmitters in the prior art. It also involves an inventive step, because it is not suggested and it provides an improvement for the quality of the sleep of the new-borns. EP-WC could proceed to grant with the claim covering CU-Em-transmit.
f) nappies X: EP-WC is the first and only application for nappies that comprise substance X for capturing urine odours. This subject-matter is however not claimed in any application.
Question 2 – Freedom
a) Zuma is free to produce and sell nappies that neutralise urine odours and in which the absorbent comprises substance X, because there is no patent protection anywhere, including the US, where they intend to be active.
b) Irrespective of the invalidity of the claim, the scope of the granted claim in EP-Z covers the nappies comprising a control unit and gold electrodes to detect the presence of urine, which Whiter produces, and will be producing, because gold is a metal not excluded by the disclaimer. In Europe, where EP-Z is in force, Whiter is neither free to produce and sell the nappies comprising acoustic warning means, a control unit and electrodes made of gold, nor the nappies comprising a transmitter, a control unit and electrodes made of gold for detecting the presence of urine. In Europe, Whiter is free to produce and sell both the nappies CU-EG and CU-EP, because the electrodes are made of conductive plastic and EP-Z claim is limited to metal electrodes.In both US and China, Whiter is free to produce and sell, because there is no patent protection covering any of the nappies above, as US-Z was abandoned and no other patent was filed.
Question 3 – Improvements
Re-file a divisional application for CU-EP. As EP-WDIV will be refused; do not pay fees for it. File new divisional application EP-WDIV2 correctly based on EP-WB. You have already approved the text for the grant of EP-WB, and therefore the EPO will soon proceed with the decision to grant. The new divisional shall be filed as soon as possible, while EP-WB is still pending. EP-WDIV2 shall have claims directed CU-EP. EP-WB does not claim priority, and the effective date is the date of filing. The claimed subject-matter is novel, because there is no relevant prior art to nappies with special electrodes for measuring pH. It also involves an inventive step, because it was not obvious to adopt known electrodes used in a remote field. EP-WDIV2 could be granted, providing Whiter with patent protection for the nappies CU-EP in Europe.
Oppose EP-Z. Whiter shall file an opposition against the grant of EP-Z. The time-limit for the notice is 17.08.22+9M=17.05.2023(Wed). Based on the analysis made in the answer of Q1, file a notice of opposition on the grounds of inventive step and added matter. The disclaimer can only be replaced by another limiting feature disclosed in EP-Z as originally filed. Otherwise the protection EP-Z confers will be extended.The only suitable features in EP-Z would be copper and platinum, and therefore there is no basis in EP-Z as originally filed to limit it to gold or any metal subgroup comprising gold. EP-Z will be revoked or at most maintained in an amended form, which does not cover the embodiment having electrodes made of gold. Whiter will then be free to produce and sell, also in Europe, the nappies with gold electrodes.
File a PCT application for X. Whiter shall file a PCT application with a claim directed to a nappy which comprises substance X as absorbent. Priority should be claimed from EP-WC, otherwise Zuma’s announcement will be novelty-destroying prior art. The claimed subject-matter will be novel, because there is no other relevant prior art to nappies with substance X. It will also involve an inventive step, because of the surprising neutralization of odour. Filing should be done as soon as possible, and not later than 06.05.23 (Sat), extended to 08.05.23 (Mon), for respecting the 12-month period. Early publication of the PCT application shall be requested. Prosecute in the national/regional phase in US, EP, China. Once patents are granted, Whiter will be able to stop Zuma from producing and/or selling the nappies, which comprise X, particularly in the US, where they have planned to start the business.
File a PCT application from EP-WC. Whiter shall file a PCT application with a claim directed to CU-Em-transmit, claiming priority from EP-WC. Hence, not later than 06.05.2023 (Sat), extended to 08.05.2023 (Mon). Prosecute in the national/regional phase in US, EP and China. Once patents are granted, Whiter will be able to stop Zuma from producing and/or selling CU-Em-transmit.

Examiner's report:
Almost all candidates did follow in their response the scheme for the questions and discussed the patent situation by subject matter, as was asked. This way of structuring the answer was intended to help the candidate not to lose marks because of an incomplete analysis. The analysis of the claim of EP-Z was expected as part of the answer for question 1 (as provided below), but it was also presented by some candidates together with the advice to oppose the patent in the answer to question 3. Here, the swapping of the corresponding parts of the answer was not detrimental to completeness and to the awarding of marks. On the other hand, the candidates who proposed the possible solution for the invalid filing of the divisional application while analysing the current situation did not always score full marks for this aspect. The candidates are expected to analyse the available prior art given in the paper, to discuss the effective date of claimed subject-matter, and to conclude on patentability and/or validity of the claim(s), even if it is stated in the exam paper that a search report only contains documents of category A, or that a communication for the intention to grant has been issued.
Some candidates did not provide a complete analysis as outlined above and were not awarded full marks. Candidates are reminded that no marks are awarded for speculation beyond the facts given in the examination paper.
Question 1 was in general well answered and, in particular, the majority of candidates recognised the invalid priority claim in EP-Z. However, the consequences of the invalid priority were not always analysed in complete and/or correct manner. For example, fewer candidates explained that the invalid priority claim caused the status of the disclaimer to change from an allowable undisclosed disclaimer, fulfilling the criteria of G1/03, to added matter under Art. 123(2) EPC. Many candidates correctly answered that EP-Y became full prior art, but quite a few lost sight of the remaining prior art. Only the good candidates provided an answer containing both the complete reasonings for added matter and lack of inventive step with respect to the claim of EP-Z. A surprisingly high number of candidates argued, incorrectly, lack of novelty on the basis of EP-Y.The peculiarity of two different first filings for nappies with metal electrodes, i.e. a filing (EP-Y) for the specific silver electrodes and another filing (EP-Z) for the generic metal electrodes, was treated correctly by very few candidates. However, the majority of candidates did score marks by writing in the answer about one of the two filings and by concluding on the invalidity of the priority claim. Not many candidates picked up on the fact that renewal fees were due for EP-WA.
Question 2. The right to carry out the invention or the freedom to operate was very often analysed in a superficial manner, because the candidates made no distinction between the countries, which were mentioned in the exam paper, and did not consider the patent rights of the parties in each country of interest. Surprisingly, a few candidates considered a patent to be a licence to operate, rather than a right to stop others from operating.
Question 3. Many candidates proposed to remedy the mistake in filing EP-WDIV by means of a new divisional application. Answers with a proposal to remedy by requesting a correction under Rule 139 EPC were also awarded some marks. Almost all the candidates proposed to oppose EP-Z. Many candidates suggested filing the opposition on the ground of added subject-matter. Fewer proposed the ground of inventive step. The ground of lack of novelty attracted no mark. Many candidates recognised that the disclaimer cannot simply be deleted, but fewer explained why the conclusion of the opposition proceedings would not be of concern for Whiter. It was generally well answered that a PCT application had to be filed for the nappies comprising substance X, because the International application can provide protection in US and China. Not many candidates recognised the relevance of Zuma’s announcement if an earlier effective date was not secured by claiming priority from EP-WC. Candidates proposing to file a divisional from EP-WC were not awarded full marks. Not many candidates scored points in relation to the need to file at least one more application claiming CU-Em-transmit to secure the non-EPC markets for the new product of Whiter.

