Legal Opinion
[001] Today is 5 March 2024. Our company Xeracno, based in Switzerland, is engaged in the business of spider silk, a material used to manufacture high-tech textile fabrics. Mr Wool is the director of the R&D department and in charge of IP matters there. Smart SA is a patent law firm representing us before the EPO.
[002] Harvesting spider silk on farms is beset with considerable difficulties in view of the spiders' innate cannibalistic instinct: when raised under standard conditions, farmed spiders kill and eat each other, and very little silk can be harvested. Disclosed more than 20 years ago, a first workaround for the problem of spider cannibalism was to raise spiders in a controlled atmosphere containing acetylene. However, acetylene is a highly inflammable gas, and its use on spider farms is so dangerous that it has been forbidden.
[003] An improved solution to the above-mentioned problem of cannibalism was more recently provided by our competitor Prosilk. On 16 January 2019, Prosilk filed European patent application EP-P1 without claiming any priority. In the description of EP-P1, it is explained that the cannibalistic instinct of spiders of the species Aranea aurata (hereinafter AA) is inhibited by CO2 and that acetylene and CO2 are completely different gases, e.g. in that CO2 is not inflammable and there are no safety restrictions on its use on spider farms. However, a high concentration of CO2 also has a negative effect on the spiders' overall silk production in that the farm's harvest yield increases up to a maximum and then decreases as a function of the concentration of CO2. This is exemplified in the description of EP-P1, which discloses an example of the claimed method where the maximum harvest yield is achieved at 6% CO2, and a comparative example, in which the concentration of CO2 is at 16%, where the resulting harvest yield is significantly lower than at any CO 2 concentration within the claimed range. EP-P1 claims a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising raising spiders of the species AA in an atmosphere containing 3% to 9% CO 2.
[004] Prosilk conducted more research and found that the above-mentioned effects of CO 2 on spiders are not specific to AA, but are similar for all spider species. On 14 January 2020 Prosilk filed another European patent application, namely EP-P2, claiming priority from EP-P1. The description of EP-P2 contains EP-P1 in its entirety and further teaches that the method of EP-P1 can be used with any other spider species and over a broader range of CO2 concentrations. The description of EP-P2 discloses a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising raising spiders in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 13% CO2. EP-P2 has a single claim directed to:
- a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising raising spiders in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 13% CO2.
[005] Prosilk's research later identified the species Aranea fortis (hereinafter AF), whose harvest yield reaches a maximum at 19% CO2, thereby enabling methods with much higher CO2 concentrations and therefore better repression of cannibalism. On 15 May 2020 Prosilk filed a further European patent application, namely EP-P3, claiming priority from EP-P2. The description of EP-P3 contains EP-P2 in its entirety and additionally discloses a method for harvesting spider silk comprising raising spiders in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 26% CO2. It further includes an exemplary embodiment of the species AF with its maximum harvest yield at 19% CO2. EP-P3 has a single claim directed to:
- a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising raising spiders in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 26% CO2.
[006] EP-P1 was withdrawn after publication. EP-P2 was granted without any amendment and the mention of the grant was published on 2 August 2023; since then renewal fees have been paid in Germany and in Switzerland only. EP-P3 is pending.
[007] After EP-P1 and EP-P2 were published, we conducted some additional research with spiders. We found that spiders of the AA species surprisingly show a further improved silk production when raised in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 26% CO 2 and from 1% to 2% of nitrogen protoxide (N2O). N2O is a gas with no safety restrictions. On 15 February 2021, Smart SA therefore filed a European patent application, namely EP-AA+, in the name of Xeracno, which discloses and claims:
- in claim 1, a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising raising spiders AA in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 26% CO 2, and from 1% to 2% N2O;
- in claim 2, dependent on claim 1, said method wherein the CO 2 concentration is 16%.
[008] In parallel, we identified another method for harvesting spiders’ silk that surprisingly increases the spiders’ lifespan. This method comprises feeding spiders with tiger mosquitos. On 14 April 2021, Smart SA filed a PCT patent application in English, namely PCT-TM+, in the name of Xeracno at the EPO as receiving office. It discloses and claims:
- in claim 1, a method for harvesting spider silk, said method comprising feeding spiders with tiger mosquitos;
- in independent claim 2, the spider silk obtained by the method of claim 1.[009] In accordance with our instructions of September 2023, Smart SA took the steps required for a valid national phase entry in the United States of America only. A notification of loss of rights was sent to us on 14 December 2023 in relation to the missed deadline for entry into the Euro-PCT regional phase. On 4 March 2024, Mr Wool realised that his internal instructions of 19 December 2023 to forward the notification of loss of rights to Smart SA and to instruct them to additionally enter the Euro-PCT regional phase had not been carried out, despite all due care having been taken.
[010] Also on 4 March 2024, i.e. yesterday, Mr Wool called Smart SA to enquire about the situation. In addition, he wanted to know why this notification had been sent to Xeracno in the first place since Smart SA had received all the communications during the international phase. He also asked Smart SA to get in touch with the EPO as soon as possible because Xeracno would definitely want to enter the European phase with PCT-TM+.
[011] EP-AA+ is still pending. Since 2022, we have been harvesting spider silk by raising AA spiders in an atmosphere containing CO2 at an optimum concentration of 16% and 1% N2O on our main farm in Spiez, Switzerland.
[012] Since September 2023, Prosilk has been harvesting spider silk on several farms in Europe, including a main farm in Germany, by raising spiders of the species AF in an atmosphere containing 19% CO2.
[013] We are now harvesting spider silk on our new farm in Colorado (USA), where AA spiders are raised in an atmosphere containing CO 2 at a concentration of 8% and are fed with tiger mosquitos. We are also planning to use the same harvesting method at a farm in Turkey in the near future, in order to better serve eastern and southern European countries.
[014] Meanwhile, one of our employees has been approached by Prosilk to join them and launch a new farm in Bosnia-Herzegovina, where spider silk will be harvested by raising spiders of the species AF in an atmosphere containing 19% CO 2, and feeding them with tiger mosquitos.
Questions:
1. Outline the patent situation as it currently stands for the claims of the following:
(a) EP-P2
(b) EP-P3
(c) EP-AA+
(d) PCT-TM+
2. What can Xeracno do to improve its patent portfolio in order to prevent Prosilk from harvesting spider silk in Germany and Bosnia-Herzegovina and selling silk in Europe?
3. In view of patent EP-P2, can Prosilk prevent Xeracno from freely
(a) harvesting spider silk in Spiez, Switzerland?
(b) harvesting spider silk in Turkey?
(c) harvesting spider silk in Colorado (USA)?
(d) importing the spider silk harvested in Turkey or Colorado into Switzerland and selling it there?
4. In view of pending patent application EP-P3, can Xeracno expect Prosilk to prevent them from freely
(a) harvesting spider silk in Spiez, Switzerland?
(b) harvesting spider silk in Turkey?
(c) harvesting spider silk in Colorado (USA)?
(d) importing the spider silk harvested in Turkey or Colorado into Switzerland and selling it there?

Answer:
Question 1
* EP-P2: EP-P1 is the first application for raising spiders AA in an atmosphere containing from 3% to 9% CO2 (AA [3-9]). EP-P2 has the same applicant as EP-P1 and it has been filed within 12 months. Claim 1 of EP-P2 has 2 effective dates due to partial priority:
- 16 January 2019 for subject matter AA [3-9] benefiting from the priority of EP-P1, and
- 14 January 2020 for remaining subject matter, i.e. for raising species other than AA with [3-9] CO2 and for raising any species with a higher concentration than 9% CO2, not benefiting from priority from EP-P1.
EP-P1 is a Art. 54(3) document for the part for which priority is invalid, because it was filed before and published after, but is not novelty destroying because it does not disclose it. Claim 1 is novel over the prior art which uses acetylene. CO2 is a different gas. Claim 1 is also inventive because raising spiders in the claimed range of CO2 concentration is not suggested in the prior art, and it avoids cannibalism while solving the safety issues. As a result, claim 1 is patentable and has been correctly granted.
* EP-P3: EP-P3 has the same applicant as in EP-P2 and it has been filed within 12 months.
Claim 1 has 2 effective dates due to partial priority:
- 14 January 2020 for subject matter first disclosed in EP-P2, i.e. for raising species other than AA with [3-9] CO2, and for raising any species with a higher concentration than 9% CO2, for which the priority claim is valid.
- 15 May 2020 for subject matter AA [3-9] and the comparative example AA [16] which are first disclosed in EP-P1, and therefore the priority claim from EP-P2 is not valid.
- 15 May 2020 for remaining subject matter, i.e. for raising any species in the CO2 range above 13%, excluding AA [16], for which priority claim is also not valid as it was not disclosed in EP-P2. EP-P1 is Art. 54(3) document because it was filed before the priority date of EP-P3 and published after.EP-P2 is also Art. 54(3) document for the claimed subject matter not enjoying priority, because it was filed before the filing date of EP-P3 and published after. Claim 1 of EP-P3 lacks novelty over any of EP-P1 and EP-P2, which disclose the comparative example AA [16] and AA [3-9]. As a result, EP-P3 as it currently stands should not proceed to grant.
* EP-AA+: No priority is claimed and therefore the effective date for both claims is the filing date. EP-P1 & EP-P2 are comprised in the state of the art under Art. 54(2) EPC, whereas EP-P3 is an Art. 54(3) document. Claim 1 is novel over the prior art due to the presence of N2O. Claim 1 is also inventive because raising spiders in the presence of N2O is not suggested in the prior art, and the presence of N2O leads to an improved silk production. Claim 2 being dependent on claim 1 is novel and inventive for the same reasons.
* PCT-TM+: No priority is claimed and therefore the effective date for both claims is the filing date. Claim 1 is novel because no prior art document discloses a spider diet involving tiger mosquitos. Claim 1 is also inventive because the feeding of spiders with tiger mosquitos is not suggested in the prior art, and such a diet surprisingly increases the spiders’ lifespan. As it currently stands, protection may therefore be expected in the US for claim 1. Claim 2 is a product-by-process claim. The result of the process is still the same spider silk as the one produced according to the prior art. Therefore, claim 2 would not be novel if the regional Euro-PCT phase was entered according to Xeracno’s wish.
Question 2
The time limit for entering the European phase for PCT-TM+ expired on 14 November 2023. The time limit for requesting further processing in response to the communication of loss of rights has expired on 14 February 2024.It is possible to request re-establishment of rights in respect of the missed further processing time limit. In the request, it should be explained why the time limit for requesting further processing could not be observed despite all due care having been taken. The omitted acts to enter the European phase have to be completed along with the payment of the further processing fees, as well as the corresponding re-establishment fees. This should be done within 2 months of the removal of the cause of non-compliance, i.e. 4 March 2024, and therefore no later than 6 May 2024. This is within one year from the unobserved time limit for requesting further processing. Additionally, the renewal fee for the third year needs to be paid, and this can be done within four months from the decision re-establishing the rights. 
As far as Bosnia-Herzegovina is concerned, the time limit of 34 months for entering the national phase was missed. A possibility to get patent protection there is to request extension of the Euro-PCT patent application when completing the omitted acts. The EPO did correctly send the notification of loss of rights to Xeracno instead of SMART SA because the appointment of a representative during the international phase does not imply that it applies also to the Euro-PCT phase. Once Xeracno obtains a European patent, and all the requirements for validation are met in Bosnia-Herzegovina, they will be able to prevent Prosilk from harvesting spider silk with a method comprising feeding of spiders with tiger mosquitos in that country. Claim 2 of PCT-TM+ cannot be granted by the EPO. However, in European countries, Xeracno will be able to prevent Prosilk from selling silk directly obtained by a method falling under the scope of claim 1, such as the one which is planned by Prosilk in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
There is nothing that can be done though against the current production of Prosilk in Germany because the method of harvesting spider silk by raising AF spiders in a concentration of 19% CO2 cannot be covered by any of Xeracno’s patent applications.
Question 3
a) Validation in Switzerland is not needed because the country has ratified the London Agreement. So EP-P2 is effective there because the renewal fees were paid. Yet the 16% CO2 concentration used at the farm in Spiez does not fall within the range covered by EP-P2 so that Xeracno is free to produce there.
b) Raising AA-spiders under 8% CO2 concentration falls within the scope of protection of the claim of EP-P2, irrespective of whether the spiders are fed with tiger mosquitos or not. There is no evidence that validation of EP-P2 in Turkey has been carried out. Additionally, the renewal fees, which were due in January 2024 have not been paid. Therefore, no patent protection is currently available there, and Xeracno is free to harvest spider silk there.
c) The patent protection of EP-P2 does not extend to the USA, so Xeracno cannot be prevented from harvesting silk in Colorado in view of EP-P2.
d) As far as importation to Switzerland is concerned, the silk harvested in Turkey or Colorado is a product directly obtained by the method of EP-P2. Therefore, Xeracno can be prevented from importing and selling this silk into Switzerland.
Question 4
At this stage of proceedings, it is advisable to file third party observations to draw the attention of the EPO to the priority and novelty issues.
a) EP-P3 cannot validly cover the harvesting method of spider silk at the farm of Spiez because raising AA spiders at CO2 concentration of 16% belongs to the prior art. It can therefore be expected that Prosilk cannot prevent Xeracno from harvesting spider silk in Spiez.
b) EP-P3 cannot validly cover AA [3-9] because this belongs to the prior art. The harvesting method of spider silk planned at the farm in Turkey involves raising AA spiders at CO2 concentration of 8%, which falls within the range of AA [3-9]. It can therefore be expected that Prosilk cannot prevent Xeracno from harvesting spider silk in Turkey.
c) The protection conferred by EP-P3 cannot be extended to the USA, so Xeracno cannot be prevented from harvesting silk in Colorado in view of EP-P3.
d) It is not possible to protect a harvesting method including an atmosphere containing 8% CO2 via EP-P3 for the same reasons as in 4)b). As a result, no patent protection can be achieved in Switzerland via EP-P3 for the product directly obtained by the harvesting method used in Colorado or Turkey. Therefore, Prosilk cannot prevent Xeracno from importing and selling this silk in Switzerland

Examiner's report:
Question 1
Most candidates realized EP-P2 and EP-P3 were only entitled to partial priority, but a small minority correctly applied the case law of G1/15 in dividing the claimed subject matter. In the aftermath of decision G1/15, the Examination Committee has repeatedly tested partial priority in view of its importance in the practice before the EPO. To the regret of the Examination Committee, it appears that the majority of EQE candidates still cannot successfully apply the principles of G1/15. In this respect, while the range of CO2 concentration was usually addressed, the generalization of spider species was often overlooked. Candidates often missed the invalid priority claim in EP-P3 to EP-P2 for the subject matter which was already disclosed in EP-P1. Even among the candidates who correctly divided the claimed subject matter, there were some who wrongly concluded that EP-P1 was novelty destroying for claim 1 of EP-P2. Few candidates realized that the comparative example, AA [16], was also novelty destroying for claim 1 of EP-P3.
The part on EP-AA+ was usually well answered. However, a surprisingly high number of candidates wrongly considered that EP-P2 was a prior art document under Art. 54(3) EPC, despite there was no indication in the paper that EP-P2 was published after the filing date of EP-AA+. The part on PCT-TM+ also quite well answered. However, discussion on the validity of product-by-process claims was often omitted.
Question 2
Overall, this question was not well answered by most candidates. Many candidates realized that there was a need to revive a Euro-PCT application after the missed regional phase entry for PCT-TM+. However, the applicable remedies that should be used to revive the application were not always properly identified and the correspondingdeadlines correctly computed (e.g. the starting point of the one-year period for re-establishment). In addition, many candidates wrongly concluded that the communication of loss of rights should have been notified to the representative. Among the candidates who discussed the opportunity to extend the geographical scope of protection of PCT-TM+ to Bosnia-Herzegovina, only a small minority recognized how this should be achieved.
Question 3
a) Some candidates speculated about possible grounds to oppose EP-P2, presumably because the opposition period had not yet lapsed; however, there was no information in the paper that any ground could be successful. A disappointing number of candidates noted that validation in Switzerland was automatic. In contrast, a good number of the candidates realized that the CO 2 concentration used in Spiez (16%) did not fall within the claimed range of EP-P2.
b) Some candidates just considered that no rights were available in Turkey, and therefore, did not discuss the fact that the CO2 concentration used in Turkey (8%) falls within the claimed range of EP-P2.
c) The majority of candidates correctly acknowledged that there were no patent rights available in the US.
d) A fair number of candidates correctly spotted the Art. 64(2) issue for importing in
Switzerland.
Question 4
a) The candidates who suggested to file third party observations against EP-P3, and the ones who suggested to file an opposition later were awarded the same number of marks. Very few candidates explained why it would not be possible for Prosilk to have protection covering the embodiment used by Xeracno, and concluded that they were free to operate.
b) and c) The b) part of this question was poorly answered, whereas the c) part of the question was well answered.
d) Very few candidates had the right answer because they simply replicated their answer to question 3 part d) without noticing that no patent right could be achieved on the 8% CO2 concentration and that therefore protection of a product directly obtained by a process was no longer applicable.

