General comments:
Candidates are reminded that they should pay attention to the way questions are asked and should not simply repeat information from the paper in the answer. Repeating information perse is not awarded any marks. Alternative answers, one being correct and one being wrong, for the markers to choose from do not attract any marks. In part I, full marks are only awarded when the full legal basis is cited to support the analysis. Some candidates lost marks due to missing or incomplete legal basis. Citing only the legal basis or repeating the text therefrom without any further explanation, reasoning or providing advice generally does not attract any marks. Alternative relevant legal basis not mentioned in the possible solution also attracted marks. It is noted in this respect that the online examination with direct access to part of the syllabus in electronic form, appears to be seen as an invitation to copy articles, rules and paragraphs from the guidelines, for which full marks are only awarded if, apart from the copied text, the explanation is also provided in view of the situation in the question. With respect to the abolished 10-day rule, most candidates followed the Decision of the Supervisory Board of 26 June 2023 and calculated the time limits according to the newest version of the rules. Nevertheless, candidates, who correctly applied the old version, were also awarded full marks this year.



Question 1:
On 5 January 2024, applicant D filed international application PCT-3 at the Spanish Patent and Trademark Office (SPTO) acting as receiving office. The PCT request indicates the EPO as International Searching Authority (ISA). The filing fee, search fee and transmittal fee have been duly paid. In a notification dated 17 January 2024, the SPTO invited applicant D to furnish a translation.
(a) In which language was PCT-3 filed and what steps does applicant D have to take for the ISA to start the search?
(b) Applicant D wants to file amended claims and correct an obvious mistake in the description at the lowest possible cost during the international phase. In what language, when and where do the respective documents have to be filed?

Answer:
(a) The SPTO accepts only Spanish as the language in which international applications may be filed, Rule 12.1(a) PCT and PCT Applicant’s Guide Annex C. PCT-3 was filed in Spanish, because otherwise the SPTO would have transmitted it to the IB, Rule 19.4(a)(ii) and Rule 19.4(b) PCT. The EPO, acting as ISA, Article 152 EPC, accepts English, French or German, PCT-EPO Guidelines A-VII, 2.1. Therefore, Spanish is not accepted. The invitation issued by the SPTO is thus an invitation under Rule 12.3(c) PCT to furnish a translation into one of English, French or German for the international search. The time limit for the late filing of the translation is the later of:
- one month from the date of the invitation, i.e. 17 January 2024 + 1 month → 17 February 2024 (Sat) → 19 February 2024 (Mon), Rule 80.5 PCT, and
- two months from the date of receipt of the international application by the receiving Office, i.e. 05.03.2024 (Tue, today). Therefore, today, D needs to file the translation and pay the late furnishing fee, Rule 12.3(e) PCT.
(b) According to Article 19(1) PCT, amended claims can only be filed after the receipt of the international search report and, according to Rule 46.1 PCT, within 2 months from the date of its transmittal or within 16 months from the priority date, whichever expires later. The amendments must be filed at the IB, Rule 46.2 PCT. Since the application is filed in Spanish, it will be published in Spanish, which is a language of publication, Rule 48.3(a) PCT. Hence, the amendments must be filed in Spanish, Rule 46.3 PCT. An obvious mistake in the description can be corrected under Rule 91.1(b)(ii) PCT. Since the application is translated under Rule 12.3(a) PCT, the rectified description needs to be filedboth in Spanish and in the language of translation, Rule 12.2(b)(i) PCT. This must be done at the EPO/ISA within 26 months from the priority date, Rule 91.2 PCT.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates stated that PCT-3 was likely filed in Spanish, as it is an accepted language by the SPTO. Fewer candidates however realized that PCT-3 must have been filed in Spanish, as it is the only language accepted by the SPTO and would otherwise have been transmitted to the IB. Quite a few candidates missed the fact that late filing of the translation is possible or did not calculate the corresponding time limits. Most candidates correctly answered when and where to file amended claims and the rectified description. Some candidates however wrongly concluded that the claim amendments must be filed in the language of translation. Many candidates missed the fact that the rectified description needs to be filed both in the language of the application and in the language of translation.



Question 2:
In November 2021, company C filed European patent application EP-2. Only the filing and search fees were paid. The publication of the European search report, which was accompanied by a negative search opinion, was mentioned in European Patent Bulletin of 17 May 2023. On 26 May 2023, the EPO issued a communication pursuant to Rule 69 EPC and an invitation pursuant to Rule 70a(1) EPC. No further acts were performed by company C. Due to an isolated mistake within a normally satisfactory monitoring system, company C became aware only today of a communication from the EPO dated 12 December 2023 noting that there has been a loss of rights. Is it still possible for company C to prosecute EP-2? If so, what steps have to be taken and by when?

Answer:
The examination fee and the designation fee had to be paid at the latest on 17 May 2023 + 6 months → 17 November 2023 (Fri), Article 94(1), Rule 70(1), Article 79(2) and Rule 39(1) EPC. Since the search opinion was negative, a reply to the opinion also had to be filed by the same date, Rule 70a(1) EPC. The communication noting the loss of rights is a communication under Rule 112(1) EPC indicating that the application is deemed to be withdrawn because three independent procedural acts were omitted:
- payment of the examination fee, Article 94(1) and (2) EPC;
- payment of the designation fee, Rule 39(2) EPC;
- non-compliance with the invitation to comment on the objections raised and/or to correct any deficiencies noted in the search opinion, Rule 70a(3) EPC.
Further processing, Article 121 and Rule 135(1) EPC, was available for each of the omitted acts until 12 December 2023 + 2 months → 12 February 2024 (Mon). Thus, today, it is too late. Removal of the cause of non-compliance is today, i.e. when company C became aware of the notification. Re-establishment into the period for further processing under Article 122(1) EPC is thus still possible until 05 March 2024 + 2 months → 05 May 2024 (Sun) → 06 May 2024 (Mon), Rule 131(4) and Rule 134(1) EPC. This is within 1 year from the missed time limit for further processing, i.e. 12 February 2024 + 1 year → 12 February 2025, Rule 136(1) EPC. The three omitted procedural acts have different legal bases and are therefore independent from each other. Consequently, three requests for re-establishment must be filed and three fees for re-establishment must be paid, Guidelines E-VIII, 3.1.3.Company C must provide evidence that the failure to observe the time limit resulted from an isolated mistake within a normally satisfactory monitoring system, Guidelines E-VIII, 3.2, which shows that all due care was taken, Rule 136(2) EPC. Company C must further complete the omitted acts for re-establishment, i.e. request further processing, Article 121(1) EPC and Rule 135(1) EPC, by:
- Paying the examination fee, and paying the fee for further processing, i.e. paying the examination fee with a 50% surcharge, Article 2(1) item 12 RFees;
- Paying the designation fee, and paying the fee for further processing, i.e. paying the designation fee with a 50% surcharge, Article 2(1) item 12 RFees;
- Filing a reply to the search opinion and paying the fee for further processing, Article 2(1) item 12 RFees.
The renewal fee for the third year was due on 30.11.2023, Rule 51(1) EPC. Hence, Rule 51(4) (a) EPC applies, i.e. the renewal fee falls due on the date of the notification of the decision re-establishing the rights and may still be paid within four months of that date without an additional fee.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates realized that the examination fee has not been paid and a reply to the written opinion was not filed in time. Some candidates forgot that the designation fee also has to be paid. Many candidates failed to recognize that the application is deemed withdrawn independently for each of the three omitted acts and did not cite all relevant legal bases. Most candidates correctly indicated that further processing was available, but the time limit for it has been missed, so that re-establishment into the period for further processing is the only option. Points were frequently missed due to wrongly calculated time limits. In particular, candidates often did not start the calculation of the 1-year time limit of Rule 136(1) EPC from the missed time limit for further processing. Moreover, the list of acts to be performed was often incomplete or insufficient legal basis was cited. Many candidates forgot to mention renewal fees or did not conclude that renewal fees for the third year will become due on the date of the notification of the decision re-establishing the rights.



Question 3:
The opposition period for European patent EP-1 expired yesterday On 16 January 2024, A and B, two nationals of Spain, A residing in Mexico and B residing in Spain, jointly filed a notice of opposition against EP-1. The opposition fee was paid on that date. The notice was filed in Spanish by A and B, named in that order, and signed by both of them. It includes the opponents' particulars, correctly identifies the opposed patent EP-1 and contains a statement of the extent to which EP-1 is opposed and properly substantiated grounds for this. On 29 January 2024, the opposition division issued an invitation to remedy deficiencies, setting a time limit of two months. Yesterday B filed a translation of the notice of opposition in English. What procedural steps need to be taken to remedy the deficiencies and for substantive examination of the joint opposition to start?

Answer:
The signature of A is invalid, because, in a joint opposition, each party or their duly authorized representative must sign the notice of opposition giving rise to their participation, Guidelines A-VIII, 1.4. Since A is not resident in a contracting state, A must appoint a professional representative for filing the opposition, Article 133(2) EPC. The invitation of the opposition division is an invitation under Rule 77(2) EPC to appoint a representative and to arrange for the signature or approval of the notice of opposition by the representative to be appointed, Guidelines D-IV, 1.2.2.2 (iv). This must be done until 29 January 2024 + 2 months → 29 March 2024 (Good Friday), Rule 134(1) EPC → 02 April 2024 (Tue). The professional representative appointed by A shall be deemed to be the common representative upon appointment, Rule 151(1) EPC.Both A and B are persons according to Article 14(4) EPC, because both are nationals of Spain and additionally B is resident of Spain, which has Spanish as an official language. Hence, the joint opponents could file the notice of opposition in Spanish, but a translation in an official language of the EPO had to be filed. The translation could be filed until the expiration of the opposition period, i.e. until yesterday, Rule 6(2) EPC. The translation was therefore filed on time. However, since the letter accompanying the translation was not filed by the common representative, it will be considered not duly signed, Rule 50(3) EPC in combination with Rule 86 EPC. The common representative, once appointed by A, will have to sign a letter accompanying the translation on invitation of the EPO within a time limit to be specified. Once this is done, the translation will retain its original date, i.e. it will be considered to havebeen filed in due time.

Examiner's report:
Although relating to rather standard matter, this question was not well answered. Most candidates realized that A, not being a resident of a contracting state, needed to appoint a professional representative, and that the representative needed to sign the notice of opposition. Many candidates wrongly argued that the appointed representative will be deemed common representative only because A, who needs representation, is named first. Some candidates realized that the translation of the notice of opposition was timely filed before the expiration of the opposition period, albeit not being validly signed. However, many failed to recognize that, to retain its original date, the accompanying letter needs to be signed by the appointed representative.



Question 4:
Your client company E is the proprietor of granted patent EP-4. EP-4 has been granted with an independent claim 1 directed to subject-matter A, a dependent claim 2 directed to subject-matter A+B, a dependent claim 3 directed to subject-matter A+C and an independent claim 4 directed to subject-matter D. Company F has filed an admissible opposition against only claim 1 of EP-4, based on the ground that the subject-matter of granted claim 1 is not new in view of prior-art document EP-D1. EP-D1 does not disclose or suggest any of the subject-matter claimed in EP-4. In response to summons to attend oral proceedings sent by the opposition division, company F filed documents EP-D2 and EP-D3, both constituting prior art under Article 54(3) EPC. It is immediately clear that, as argued by company F, EP-D2 discloses subject-matter A and EP-D3 discloses subject-matter D. Advise company E on how to obtain a valid patent conferring the maximum possible scope of protection.

Answer:
EP-D2 and EP-D3 are late filed, Guidelines E-VI, 2.1, because they were filed after the expiry of the opposition period according to Article 99(1) EPC, Rule 76(2)(c) EPC. The EPO may disregard evidence, which has not been submitted by the parties in due time, Article 114(2) EPC.
In the present case:
- EP-D2 will be admitted into the proceedings, because it is prima facie relevant to the assessment of novelty, Article 114(1) EPC, Guidelines E-VI, 2.1;
- EP-D3 will not be admitted into the proceedings, because it is not related to the extent of the opposition, G9/91.
Claim 1 of EP-4 lacks novelty in view of EP-D2, Article 100(a) EPC in conjunction with Articles 52(1) and 54(3) EPC. Therefore, company E should as soon as possible file a new (main) request with claims directed to subject-matters 1: A+B, 2: A+C and 3: D. The replacement of one independent claim as granted by two independent claims is admissible as the replacement is occasioned by a ground for opposition, Guidelines H-II, 3.1. The thus amended claims are novel over EP-D2. The patent will therefore be maintained in amended form, Article 101(3)(a) EPC.The resulting patent will nevertheless not be valid. The claim directed to subject-matter D lacks novelty over EP-D3 but cannot be deleted in opposition proceedings, because it is not part of the extent of the opposition, G9/91. To obtain a valid patent, company E should file a request for limitation, Article 105a(1) EPC, after the opposition proceedings are terminated, Article 105a(2) EPC. To this end, company E should file a new set of claims, wherein the claim directed to D is deleted, and pay the limitation fee, Article 105a(1) EPC, Article 2(1) item 10a RFees.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates realized that EP-D2 and EP-D3 were late filed and will be admitted into the proceedings only if they are prima facie prejudicial to the maintenance of the patent. However, many candidates failed to recognize that EP-D3 is only relevant for claim 4, which is not covered by the extent of the opposition and will therefore not be admitted. Many candidates copied relevant provisions but failed to apply those to the situation at hand. Most candidates correctly suggested filing amended claims relating to subject-matters A+B and A+C. Many candidates did not realize that subject-matter D cannot remain in a valid patent. Of those, who did, the majority missed that, to obtain a valid patent, subject-matter D should be deleted in a limitation procedure after the opposition.



Question 5:
Your client, applicant H, a national and resident of Morocco, filed European patent application EP-7 in French in March 2020. The mention of the grant was published on 21 February 2024. What steps have to be taken and by when to:
(a) obtain patent protection in the United Kingdom and Poland; and
(b) obtain unitary patent protection?

Answer:
(a) The renewal fee for the 5th year is due to the national offices, Article 86(2) EPC. For Poland the renewal fee is due on 21 February 2024 + 2 months → 21 April 2024 (Sun) → 22 April 2024 (Mon), National Law Table VI and Article 141(2) EPC. The UK allows for payment up to the last day of the 3rd month after the publication of the mention of the grant 21 February 2024 + 3 months → 21 May 2024 → 31 May 2024 (Fri), National Law Table VI. For Poland, the patent specification needs to be translated into Polish, National Law Table IV and Article 65(1) EPC, within 3 months, 21 February 2024 + 3 months → 21 May 2024 (Tue). The special fee needs to be paid within 3 months from invitation by the Polish Patent Office, National Law Table IV. A Polish national representative must be appointed, National Law Tables IV and VI.A. UK is a contracting state to the London Agreement. Therefore, no acts of validation are required.
(b) A request should be filed in French, Rule 6(2) UPR (Rules relating to Unitary Patent Protection), with the EPO within 1 month, Rule 6(1) UPR, 21 February 2024 + 1 month → 21 March 2024 (Thu). It should contain the particulars of the proprietor, the number of theEuropean Patent, the particulars of a representative, as H is national and resident of Morocco, and a full translation of the specification into English. The renewal fee for the 5th year is due within 3 months of the date of notification of the communication of registration of the unitary effect, Rule 13(4) or Rule 13(5) UPR, depending on the date of notification of the Rule 7(1) UPR communication, and is to be paid to the EPO, Rule 13(1) UPR.

Examiner's report:
Most candidates provided the correct steps and bases needed to validate EP-7 in Poland and the UK, as well as those needed to obtain Unitary Patent protection. Points were mostly lost with respect to when and where renewal fees need to be paid. For example, most candidates overlooked the special provisions for payment of therenewal fees in the UK. Considering that this was the first time a question was asked on Unitary Patent protection, most candidates were well prepared and cited the relevant legal basis.

